Class 
Book 


TRV^ifw 


PRIVVfl 


t  > 


MEMOIRS 


OF 


WILLIAM    MILLER, 


GENERALLY  KNOWN  AS 


A  LECTURER  ON  THE  PROPHECIES,  AND  THE 
SECOND  COMING  OF  CHRIST. 


BY 

SYLVESTER    BLISS, 

AUTHOR   OF   "ANALYSIS   OF   SACRED   CHRONOLOGY,"    "A  BRIEF   COM- 
MENTARY  ON   THE   APOCALYPSE,"    ETC. 


BOSTON: 
PUBLISHED  BY  JOSHUA  V.  HIMES, 

8   CHAEBOS   STREET. 

1853. 


_^c^^^\xv 


DAGUERREOTYPE   YIE^    01    MP.  MILLER5 S    LA3*   RESIDENCE. 
5m  p.  64. 


LC 


Control  Nui^er 


Stereotyped   by 
HOBART     &     BOBBIN  5. 
RW   HK&AHD    TYPE  A3TO    STEREOTYPE    «>BK 

BOSTON. 


1 

tmP96      031690 


r 


sjrj^Li'zs  s-:\'J-r--ii.\"  s.-. 


J 


J' 


9~f^ypitMu^ 


L 


VOICE   OF   WARNING. 


THE  WHEAT   AXD  THE  TARES  SHALL   GROW  TOGETHER 

UXTIL.  THE   HARVEST:    THE  HARVEST  IS 

THE  ESD   OF  THE   WORLD. 


No.  1. 


BOSTON,  OCT.  I.  1842. 


Vol.  t. 


End  of  the  World, 

Question. — You  believe  that 
the  Lord  is  to  make  his  second 
personal  appearance  on  earth 
next  year.  Will  you  tell  me 
for  what  purpose  he  is  coming  ? 

Answer.  —  "He  corneth  to 
JUDGE  THE  EAKTH."  Ps. 
xcvi.  and  xcviii.  "  He  shall 
judge  the  world  in  righteous- 
ness, he  shall  minister  judgment 
to  the  people  in  uprightness. 
The  wicked  shall  be  turned  in^o 
hell,  with  all  the  nations  that 
forget  God.  For  the  needy  shall 
not  always  be  forgotten :  the 
expectation  of  the  poor  shall  not 
perish  forever."   Ps.  ix.  8, 17,  IS. 

Q. — What  particular  events 
will  take  place  at  his  coming  ? 

A.—"  The  Lord  nimself  shall 
descend  from  heaven  with  a 
shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  arch- 
angel, and  with  the  trump  of 
God  :  and  the  dead  in  Christ 
shall  rise  first  ■  then  we  which 
are  alive  and  remain  shall  be 
caught  up  together  with  them  in 
the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in 
the  air  ;  and  so  shall  we  ever  be 
with  the  Lord."  1  Thess.  iv. 
16,  17. 


Q. — Are  all  to  be  thus  caught 
up  ? 

A. — No  ;  for  the  same  apos- 
tle expressly  declares  that  •'  the 
Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed 
from  heaven,  with  his  mighty 
angels,  in  flaming  fire,  taking 
vengeance  on  them  that  know 
not  God,  and  that  obey  not  the 
gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ; 
who  shall  be  punished  with  ever- 
lasting destruction  from  the  pres- 
ence of  the  Lord  and  from  the 
glory  of  his  power;  when  he 
shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  his 
saints,  and  to  be  admired  in  all 
them  that  believe  in  that  day." 
2  Thess.  i.  8—10. 

Q.  —-Will  the  earth  be  annihi- 
lated? 

A. — No:  but  "the  elements 
shall  melt  with  fervent  heat, 
and  the  earth  also ;  and  the 
works  that  are  therein  shall  be 
burned  up."     2  Peter  iii.  10. 

Q. — What  will  be  done  with 
the  melted  earth  ? 

A. — "Nevertheless,  we.  ac- 
cording to  his  promise,  look  for 
new  heavens  and  a  NEW 
EARTH,  wherein  dwelleth 
righteousness."  2  Peter  iii. 
13. 


THE  HARVEST  THE  END  OF  THE  WORLD. 


q — Will  the  new  earth  be 
inhabited  ? 

A. — Yes.  "  Blessed  are  the 
meek,  for  they  shall  inherit  the 
earth."  Matt.  v.  5.  "  And 
they  sang  a  new  song,  saying, 
Thou  art  worthy  to  take  the 
book,  and  to  open  the  seals 
thereof:  for  thou  wast  slain, 
and  hast  redeemed  us  to  God 
by  thy  blood  out  of  every  kin- 
dred, and  tongue,  and  people, 
and  nation ;  and  hast  made  us 
unto  our  God  kings  and  priests : 
and  WE  SHALL  REIGN  ON 
THE  EARTH."  Rev.  v.  9, 
10.  "  And  the  kingdom,  and 
dominion,  and  the  greatness  of 
the  kingdom  under  the  whole 
heaven,  shall  be  given  to  the 
people  of  the  saints  of  the  Most 
High,  whose  kingdom  is  an 
everlasting  kingdom,  and  all  do- 
minions shall  serve  and  obey 
him."     Daniel  vii.  27. 

Q. — Then  I  understand  your 
belief  to  be,  that  next  year,  the 
year  1843,  is  the  time  fixed  in 
the  counsels  of  eternity  for  the 
consummation  of  all  the  grand 
events  spoken  of  by  the  prophets 
and  apostles  concerning  the  final 
destiny  of  all  men  ? 

A. — Yes.  Sometime  in  the 
course  of  next  year,  being  one 
thousand  eight  hundred  and 
forty-three  years  from  the  birth 
of  our  Saviour,  one  thousand 
eight  hundred  and  ten  years 
from  his   crucifixion,  and  two 


thousand  three  hundred  years 
from  the  going  forth  of  the  com- 
mandment to  restore  and  build 
Jerusalem,  I  expect  to  see  what 
Daniel  saw,,  viz.,  "One  like  the 
Son  of  man/'  who  "came  with 
the  clouds  of  heaven,  and  came 
to  the  Ancient  of  days,  and  they 
brought  him  near  before  him. 
And  there  was  given  him  do- 
minion, and  glory,  and  a  king- 
dom, that  all  people,  nations, 
and  languages,  should  serve 
him :  his  dominion  is  an  ever- 
lasting dominion,  which  shall 
not  pass  away,  and  his  king- 
dom that  which  shall  not  be 
destroyed."  Daniel  vii.  13,  14. 
Next  year  I  expect  to  see  that 
day  come,  spoken  of  by  Malachi 
the  prophet,  "  that  shall  burn 
as  an  oven  ;  and  all  the  proud, 
yea,  and  all  that  do  wickedly, 
shall  be  stubble  ;  and  the  day 
that  cometh  shall  burn  them  up, 
saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  that  it 
shall  leave  them  neither  root  nor 
branch."  Next  year,  I  expect 
that  unto  those  who  fear  the 
name  of  the  Lord,  u  shall  the 
Sun  of  righteousness  arise  with 
healing  in  his  wings  :  and  ye 
shall  go  forth  and  grow  up  as 
calves  of  the  stall.  And  ye 
shall  tread  down  the  wicked ; 
for  they  shall  be  ashes  under 
the  soles  of  your  feet  in  the  day 
that  I  shall  do  this,  saith  the 
Lord  of  hosts."  [See  last  chap. 
Malachi.]     Next  year  I  expect 


THE  HARVEST  THE  END  OF  THE  WORLD. 


all  the  saints  will  see  what  John 
saw  when  he  was  in  the  isle  of 
Patmos*  "  A  new  heaven  and  a 
new  earth  ;  for  the  first  heaven 
and  the  first  earth  were  passed 
away  ;  and  there  was  no  more 
sea.  And  I  John  saw  the  holy 
city,  new  Jerusalem,  coming 
down  from  God  out  of  heaven, 
prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for 
her  husband."  Next  year  I  be- 
lieve all  the  saints  will  hear  what 
John  heard :  "  And  I  heard  a 
great  voice  out  of  heaven, 
saying,  Behold,  the  tabernacle 
of  God  is  with  men,  and  he  will 
dwell  with  them,  and  they  shall 
be  his  people,  and  God  himself 
shall  be  with  them,  and  be  their 
God.  And  God  shall  wipe  awray 
all  tears  from  their  eyes ;  and 
there  shall  be  no  more  death, 
neither  sorrow,  nor  crying, 
neither  shall  there  be  any  more 
pain :  for  the  former  things  are 
passed  away.  And  he  that  sat 
upon  the  throne  said,  Behold,  I 
make  all  things  new."  Rev. 
xxi.  1 — 5.  Next  year  I  believe 
ali  the  saints  of  God  will  hear 
the  last  trump';  that  trump 
whose  unearthly  sound  shall 
rend  the  heavens  and  penetrate 
the  lowest  caverns  of  the  earth ; 
that  trump  which  shall  awaken 
into  everlasting  life  the  sleeping 
dust  of  every  righteous  son  and 
daughter  of  Adam  that  has  ever 
lived,  and  change,  instantly,  the 
mortal    body    of    each    living 


Christian,  and  clothe  andvJjDwn 
him  and  them  [the  raised  ones] 
with  immortality  and  eternal 
life.  Next  year  I  believe  will 
"  be  brought  to  pass  the  saying 
that  is  written,  Death  is  swal- 
lowed up  in  victory.  0  death, 
where  is  thy  sting  ?  0  grave, 
where  is  thy  victory?"  1  Cor. 
xv.  54,  55. 

Q. — Why  do  you  believe  these 
events  will  transpire  next  year  ? 

A. — Because  Daniel's  vision, 
which  embraced  all  the  impor- 
tant events  in  the  world's  his- 
tory, from  its  commencement 
down  to  the  end  of  time,  will 
terminate  then. 

Q. — How  do  you  know  ? 

A. — Because  the  angel  Ga- 
briel told  Daniel  that  all  the 
wonders  which  he  had  seen  in 
the  vision,  would  be  consum- 
mated in  2300  days,  or  years. 

Q. — What  right  have  you  to 
reckon  days  as  years  ? 

A. — Because  that  was  a  com- 
mon method  of  reckoning  pro- 
phetic time  among  the  Jews  ; 
and,  moreover,  we  find  by  pur- 
suing this  mode  of  reckoning, 
that  all  the  intermediate  events 
which  were  to  transpire  between 
the  commencement  and  termi- 
nation of  Daniel's  vision,  were 
fulfilled  in  precisely  the  same 
number  of  years  as  Gabriel  said 
there  would  be  days  in  their  ac- 
complishment. The  streets  of 
Jerusalem  wrere  to  be  built  in 


THE  HARVEST  THE  END  OF  THE  WORLD. 


troublous  times,  and  to  be 
finished  during  the  first  seven 
weeks  of  the  vision.  Well,  we 
find  that  in  just  49  years,  the 
exact  number  of  days  that  there 
are  in  seven  weeks,  the  walls 
of^  Jerusalem  were  completed, 
having  been  commenced  by 
Ezra  and  finished  by  Nehe- 
miah.  Then  the  next  portion 
of  the  vision  mentioned  by  the 
angel,  to  wit,  the  threescore 
and  two  weeks  unto  Messiah 
the  Prince,  were  fulfilled  in  just 
the  number  of  years  that  there 
are  days  in  62  weeks,  at  the 
baptism  of  our  Lord  by  John, 
when  his  Messiahship  was  dis- 
tinctly announced  by  an  audible 
voice  from  heaven,  and  by  the 
descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
the  bodily  shape  of  a  dove  and 
lighting  upon  him.  But  the 
grand  event — that  event  which 
the  angel  informed  Daniel  was 
to  fix  God's  everlasting  seal  to 
the  whole  vision,  and  make  it 
sure  beyond  the  power  of  man 
to  gainsay — that  event,  the  angel 
said,  it  was  determined  should 
be  fulfilled  in  seventy  weeks 
"  from  the  going  forth  of  the 
commandment  to  restore  and  to 
build  Jerusalem."  That  event, 
Daniel  was  informed,  would  be 
the  cutting  off  of  the  Messiah 
the  Prince.  Accordingly,  I  com- 
mence at  that  event,  which,  re- 
member, was  to  seal  the  vision 
and  make  it  sure,  not  only  in  its 


great  whole,  but  in  all  its  parts 
and  divisions — I  begin,  I  say,  at 
the  crucifixion,  and  reckon  back 
70  weeks,  in  which  there  are 
just  490  days,  and  what  do  I 
find  ?  I  find  the  identical  thing 
which  the  angel  told  Daniel 
should  form  the  starting  point 
of  the  vision,  viz.,  the  decree  of 
Artaxerxes  to  restore  and  to 
build  Jerusalem.  Here,  then, 
is  the  sealing  event  of  Daniel's 
vision,  fulfilled  according  to  the 
chronology  of  the  Bible,  in  just 
490  years,  reckoning  a  year  a 
day.  From  this,  I  think,  we  are 
fully  authorized  to  reckon  the 
whole  vision  by  the  same  rule; 
and  therefore,  just  as  surely  as 
that  Christ  was  crucified  490 
years  from  the  going  forth  of 
the  commandment  to  build  Jeru- 
salem, just  so  surely  will  the 
whole  vision  be  fulfilled  in  2300 
years  from  the  same  period. 
Those  2300  years  will  expire 
NEXT  YEAR,  1843!        o.  s. 


DEPOT     OP 

SECOND  ADVENT  BOOKS, 
At  Bo.  14  Devonshire  Street,  Boston, 

(Up  Stairs.)  a  few  rods  from  the  Post  Office. 

Miller's  Lectures  and  complete  Works  on 
the  Second  Coming  of  Christ  in  1843. 

The  Works  of  Rev.  J.  Litch,  Rev.  C.  Fitch. 
and  the  Rev.  G.  F.  Cox.  and  others,  on  the 
Second  Advent  and  Millennium. 

THE  SIGNS  OF  THE  '  TIMES,  a  Weekly 
Paper,  edited  by  J.  V.  Himes  and  J.  Litch. 
devoted  to  the  exposition  of  the  Prophecies 
relating  to  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ. 
Price.  $1.00  per  volume,  containing  24  num- 
bers. 


.MsB^ 


PREFACE 


The  name  of  William  Miller,  of  Low  Hampton,  N.  Y.,  is  too 
well  known  to  require  an  extended  introduction ;  but,  while  well 
known,  few  men  have  been  more  diversely  regarded  than  he. 
Those  who  have  only  heard  his  name  associated  with  all  that  is 
hateful  in  fanaticism,  have  necessarily  formed  opinions  respecting 
him  anything  but  complimentary  to  his  intelligence  and  sanity ; 
but  those  who  knew  him  better,  esteemed  him  as  a  man  of  more 
than  ordinary  mental  power,  —  a  cool,  sagacious,  and  honest  rea- 
soner,  an  humble  and  devout  Christian,  a  kind  and  affectionate 
friend,  and  a  man  of  great  moral  and  social  worth.  That  the 
impartial  reader  may  be  able  to  form  a  just  estimate  of  one  who 
has  occupied  so  conspicuous  a  position  before  the  public,  the 
following  pages  are  compiled. 

To  see  a  man  as  he  is,  it  is  necessary  to  accompany  him  through 
the  walks  of  his  daily  life ;  to  trace  the  manner  in  which  he  has 
arrived  at  his  conclusions ;  to  follow  him  into  his  closet  and  places 
of  retirement ;  to  learn  the  various  workings  of  his  mind  through 
a  long  series  of  years,  and  to  scan  closely  his  motives.  A  knowl- 
edge of  these  can  be  arrived  at  only  by  a  simple  collection  of  facts 
and  documents  illustrative  of  his  history.  By  full  extracts  from 
his  unstudied  correspondence,  by  his  published  writings,  by  nar- 
rations of  interviews  with  him,  by  the  free  use  of  his  papers 
and  memorandums,  and  by  the  testimony  of  impartial  witnesses 
respecting  his  labors  in  various  places,  in  addition  to  a  long  per- 
sonal acquaintance,  his  biographer  has  been  enabled  to  embody 
much  important  information  respecting  him.  It  has  not  been 
deemed  necessary  to  eulogize  him,  nor  to  apologize  for  him.  His 
acts  and  life  are  permitted  to  stand  forth,  divested  of  the  veil  of 
partiality,  or  of  prejudice.  His  opinions  on  all  subjects  are 
expressed  in  his  own  language,  —  having  himself  narrated  the 
workings  of  his  own  mind,  at  the  various  periods  of  his  life.     His 


IV  PREFACE. 

biographer  has  not  felt  warranted  to  omit  opinions  on  any  prom- 
inent question,  or  to  modify  the  phraseology  in  which  they  are 
expressed,  to  meet  the  views  of  those  who  dissented  from  him. 
Such  a  course  would  have  been  unjust  to  Mr.  Miller. 

However  his  public  labors  may  be  regarded  by  a  majority  of 
the  community,  it  will  be  seen,  by  a  perusal  of  his  life,  that  these 
were  by  no  means  unproductive  of  great  good.  The  revivals  of 
religion  which  attended  his  labors  are  testified  to  by  those  who 
participated  in  them;  and  hundreds  of  souls  will  ever  refer  to 
him  as  a  means,  under  God,  of  their  awakening  and  conversion. 

His  erroneous  calculation  of  the  prophetic  periods  he  frankly 
confessed;  and  those  who  regarded  his  views  of  prophecy  as 
dependent  on  that,  may  be  surprised  to  learn  that  he  distinguished 
between  the  manner  and  the  era  of  their  fulfilment. 

It  is  believed  that  the  influence  exerted  by  Mr.  Miller  will  not 
prove  evanescent  in  its  results.  The  attention  which  was  given 
to  his  arguments  caused  many  minds  entirely  to  change  their  pre- 
conceived opinions  respecting  the  millennial  state,  who  have  since 
remained  devoted  Christians,  ardently  looking  for  the  Nobleman 
who  has  gone  into  a  far  country  to  receive  for  himself  a  kingdom, 
and  to  return.  —  Luke  19  :  12.  As  the  public  learn  to  discrim- 
inate between  the  actual  position  of  Mr.  Miller  and  that  which 
prejudice  has  conceived  that  he  occupied,  his  conservativeness  and 
disapprobation  of  every  fanatical  practice  will  be  admitted,  and  a 
much  more  just  estimate  will  be  had  of  him. 

These  Memoirs  were  commenced  by  Elder  Apollos  Hale,  who 
prepared  the  first  three  chapters.  Other  duties  having  interfered 
with  his  progress  in  the  work,  its  completion  has  devolved  on 
another.  No  labor  or  expense  has  been  spared  to  give  a  full  and 
impartial  history  of  his  life,  the  principal  incidents  of  which,  as 
here  recorded,  were  originally  related  by  him.  Desiring  "  nothing 
to  extenuate,  nor  to  set  down  aught  in  malice,"  these  incidents  of 
his  history,  and  this  embodiment  of  his  views,  I  here  present  to  the 
Christian  public  as  an  act  of  justice  to  Mr.  Miller. 

JOSHUA  V.  HIMES. 

Boston,  January,  1853. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE. 

Chapter  I.  His  Ancestry  —  Early  Life  —  Personal  Traits  —  Edu- 
cation, &c r    .  1 

Chapter  II.     His   Marriage  —  Independence   Hymn  —  Politics  — ■ 

Worldly  Prospects  —  Deistical  Sentiments  —  Position,  &c 17 

Chapter  III.  His  Military  Life  —  March  to  Burlington  —  Re- 
cruiting Service  —  Sickness  —  Campaign  of  1814  —  Army  Dis- 
cipline—  Battle  of  Plattsburg — Of  Champlain  —  Letter  to 
Judge  Stanley  —  To  his  Wife  —  Close  of  the  War,  &c 31 

Chapter  IV.  Removal  to  Low  Hampton  —  His  Conversion  — 
Study  of  the  Bible  —  Rales  of  Interpretation  —  The  Teachings 
of  Prophecy  —  His  Creed,  &c 63 

Chapter  V.     Interval  between  his  Conversion  and  Public  Labors 

—  Letters  — His  Dream  . —  Acrostic  —  Letter  from  Elder  Hendryx 

—  Dialogue  with  a  Physician,  &c 80 

Chapter  VI.     Commencement   of  his   Public   Labors  —  Publishes 

his  Views  in  Pamphlet  —  Interview  on  the  Hudson  River  Boat 

—  His  Regard  for  the  Bible  —  Correspondence,  &c 97 

Chapter  VII.     Becomes   a   Licensed    Preacher — Visits    different 

places  —  Letter  to  a  Universalist  —  Poetical  Letter  —  Memo- 
randum of  his  Labors  —  Sketch  of  a  Discourse,  &c 108 

Chapter  VIII.  Doors  open  for  him  to  lecture — Is  countenanced 
by  the  Ministers  of  his  Denomination  —  His  First  Assist- 
ance—  Death  of  his  Mother — Incident  at  Shaftsbury  —  Result 
of  his  Labors  —  Testimony  of  a  Convert  from  Infidelity  — Let- 
ter of  Rev.  Charles  Fitch  —  LTrgent  Appeals  to  visit  different 
Towns,  &c 119 

Chapter  IX.  He  visits  Massachusetts — Invitation  to  Lowell  — 
Extract  from  the  Lynn  Record  —  Is  invited  to  Boston  —  Con- 
versation with  Elder  Himes  —  Publication  of  his  Lectures  —  Lec- 
tures in  Portsmouth,  &c 134 

Chapter  X.  Publication  of  the  "  Signs  of  the  Times  "  — Visits  to 
Watertown,  Portland,  New  York  city,  &c. — His  Sickness  — 
Resignation,  &c 144 

Chapter  XI.  Lectures  in  Boston  (4th,  5th,  and  6th  courses)  — 
In  Andover,   Providence,   Gralway,   N.   Y.,  Claremont,  N.  H., 

l* 


VI  CONTENTS. 

Benson,  Vt. —His  Illness— Incident  at  Sandy  Hill— At 
Worcester  —  The  Phrenologist — Lectures  in  Hartford,  &c.  .   .    .154 

Chapter  XII.  Lectures  in  New  York,  Newark,  Saratoga,  New- 
buryport,  Palmer,  East  Kingston  Camp-meeting,  Brandon,  Vt., 
Benson,  Chickopee,  Mass.,  New  Haven,  Ct.,  &c 163 

Chapter  XIII.  Synopsis  of  his  Views  —  Address  to  Believers  in 
the  near  Advent  —  Interview  at  Waterford  —  Utica  —  Hoax 
at  Washington  —  Disturbance  at  Philadelphia  —  The  3d  of 
April  —  Statement  of  his  Affairs— Is  defended  by  the  Secular 
Press,   &c 170 

Chapter  XIV.  Mr.  Miller  and  his  Reviewers,  Doctors  Dowl- 
ing,  Chase,  Jarvis,  &c.  —  The  Fourth  Kingdom  —  The  Little 
Horn  —  Prophetic  Numbers  —  Seventy  Weeks  —  Coming  of 
Christ,    &c 185 

Chapter  XV.     His  Treatment  of  Opponents  —  Specimens  of  his 

Preaching,  Colloquial,  Expository,  &c 206 

Chapter  XVI.  His  Sickness  —  Visit  to  Massachusetts  —  Fanat- 
icism —  Mr.  Miller  repudiates  it,  &c 227 

Chapter  XVII.  Emotions  in  View  of  the  Advent  —  Home  of  Mr. 
Miller  —  Tour  into  Western  New  York  —  His  Personal  Ap- 
pearance—  Address  to  all  Denominations  —  Visit  to  Wash- 
ington,  &c 239 

Chapter  XVIII.  The  Passing  of  the  Time  —  His  Position  — 
The  Burning  Day  —  Lines  on  his  Disappointment  —  Confession 

—  Visit  of  Elder  Litch  —  Mr.  Miller  and  the  Methodist  Minis- 
ters —  Tour  to  Ohio  —  Return,  &c 254 

Chapter  XIX.  The  Seventh  Month  Movement  —  Anticipations 
of  Christ's  Coming — The  Derry  Camp-meeting  —  Disappoint- 
ment —  The  Nobleman   and  his   Servants  —  Need  of  Patience 

—  Conference  at  Low  Hampton  —  Easy  Mode  of  converting 
Men. —  Ecclesiastical  Council  at  Low  Hampton,  &c 209 

Chapter  XX.     Results  of  the  Seventh  Month  —  Discussion  of  New 

Questions  —  Mr.  Miller's  Position  respecting  them,  &c 2-93 

Chapter  XXI.  Mutual  Conference  at  Albany  —  Declaration  of 
Principles  —  Plan  of  Operations  —  Address  to  the  Brethren  — 
Action  of  the  Conference  defended  by  Mr.  Miller,  &c 300 

Chapter  XXII.  His  Apology  and  Defence  —  Definiteness  of  Pro- 
phetic Time  —  Erroneous  Views  Connected  with  the  Doctrine, 
&c 325 

Chapter  XXIH.  The  Value  of  Faith  —  Unfinished  Letter  —  Visit 
to  New  York  city — Philadelphia,  &c.  — Address  to  the  Public 

—  Visit  to  Canada 340 

Chapter  XXIV.     His  Dream  —  Loss  of  Sight  —  Events  in  Europe 

—  Health    Declines  —  Expression   of    Sympathy  —  His  Reply, 

&c . , 358 

Chapter  XXV.     His  last  Sickness  —  Death  —  Funeral  —  Letter  of 

Condolence  to  Surviving   Friends,  &c .  376 

Chapter  XXVI.     Extracts    from  his    Published   Writings  —  The 

Kingdom  of  God  —  The  Times  and  its  Duties  —  A  Scene  of  the 

Last  Day,  &c 384 


MEMOIKS 


OF 


WILLIAM    MILLER. 


CHAPTER  I. 

ANCESTRY  AND  EARLY  LIFE. 

About  a  mile  west  from  the  centre  of  Pittsfield  vil- 
lage, one  of  the  most  pleasant  in  western  Massachu- 
setts, there  is  a  noble  and  fertile  swell  of  land,  which 
rises  from  the  west  bank  of  Pontousooc  river — the  west- 
ern branch  of  the  head-waters  of  the  Housatonic  —  and  is 
of  sufficient  extent  to  constitute  several  large  farms. 
The  summit  of  this  fine  elevation  embraces  what  is 
familiarly  known  in  the  neighborhood  as  "the  Miller 
farm."  It  takes  its  name  from  a  family  by  the  name 
of  Miller,  who  came  from  the  vicinity  of  Connecticut 
river,  in  or  near  Springfield,  Massachusetts,  about  a  hun- 
dred years  ago.^ 

#  We  take  the  following  extract  from  a  manuscript  copy  of  a  letter 
addressed  to  one  of  the  Miller  family,  in  G-eorgeville,  Lower  Canada, 
dated  September  27,  1830.  It  was  written  by  William  Miller,  in 
answer  to  a  request  for  information  on  his  family  history ;  and  is  a 
curious  but  characteristic  production  : 

"My  grandfather,  William  Miller,  married  a  respectable  girl,  by 
the  name  of  Hannah  Leonard,  in  West  Springfield  ;  and  moved  into 
Pittsfield,  then  called  Ponthoosoc,  about  1747,  and  there  had  three 
sons  and  one  daughter.  One  son  died  young;  the  daughter  about 
middle  age,  after  being  married,  and  having  a  son  and  daughter,  by 
Nathaniel  Spring,  named  William  and  Hannah.  The  other  two 
sons,  named  Elihu  and  William,  married  and  had  large  families, 
many  of  whom  are  yet  alive.  I  sprung  from  the  youngest  brother, 
William ." 


2  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    MILLER. 

Family  tradition  uniformly  connects  this  branch  of 
the  Miller  family  with  Obadiah  and  Thomas  Miller,  of 
a  previous  generation,  undoubtedly  the  persons  of  these 
names  who  are  mentioned  in  the  history  of  Springfield 
and  Westfieldj  two  hundred  years  since. 

The  surrounding  country,  as  seen  from  the  Miller 
farm,  furnishes  one  of  the  most  interesting  prospects 
afforded  by  the  natural  scenery  of  New  England.  On 
the  north.  Saddle  Mountain,  the  highest  elevation  of 
land  in  the  state,  towers  far  above  all  the  other  barriers 
of  the  valley;  and  while  its  "Gray  Lock''  will  ever 
cause  it  to  be  regarded  as  the  venerable  and  natural 
guardian  of  the  adjacent  portion  of  the  world,  it  is 
pointed  out  as  the  site  of  Fort  Massachusetts,  so  memo- 
rable for  the  scenes  connected  with  its  history  during  the 
French  and  Indian  wars.  The  Washington  Mountains 
form  the  strong  background  of  the  view  on  the  east; 
the  Hancock  Mountains,  a  section  of  the  Green  Moun- 
tain range,  of  which  Saddle  Mountain  is  the  climax, 
bound  the  view  on  the  west :  and  some  isolated  moun- 
tainous elevations,  through  which  the  branches  of  the 
Housatonic  river  and  railroad  pass,  are  the  prominent 
items  in  the  prospect  to  the  south. 

On  this  commanding  spot,  the  family  of  early  adven- 
turers erected  their  primitive  dwelling  :  and.  although 
their  history  is  unknown  to  the  world,  the  strong  features 
of  their  character,  as  preserved  in  the  memory  of  their 
descendants,  were,  the  most  daring  contempt  of  danger, 
great  love  of  independence,  great  capability  of  endurance, 
and  whole-souled  patriotism.  The  head  of  this  family 
was  the  grandfather  of  William  Miller,  whose  life  these 
pages  record.  The  name  of  the  grandfather  was  William : 
his  son.  who  was  born  and  resided  here,  was  named 
William :  and  here  also  was  born  the  one  who  has  just 
passed  away,  and  whose  world-wide  fame  demands  that 
his  history  should  now  be  written.  This  William  Mil- 
ler was  born  February  loth.  A.  D.  17S2.  He  was  the 
eldest  of  sixteen  children,  five  of  whom  were  sons  and 
eleven  were  daughters. 

The  lot  of  ground  on  which  the  ancient  dwelling 
stood  is  designated,  on  the  new  map  of  Pittsfield,  by  the 
name  of  i;  Dr.  J.  Leland  Miller.'*     The  building  itself  is 


HIS    ANCESTRY.  O 

no  more.  The  remains  of  the  cellar  are  still  visible; 
and  the  ruins  are  marked  by  an  ancient  gooseberry  bush, 
a  hardy  specimen  of  the  wild  thorn,  and  an  elm  of  the 
age,  perhaps,  of  twenty  years. 

The  period  immediately  preceding  his  birth  was  the 
most  critical  of  any  period  in  the  history  of  our  country ; 
and  was,  probably,  the  most  distinguished  by  its  perils, 
the  sublimity  of  its  events,  the  noble  development  of 
character  it  furnished,  and  its  commanding  interpositions 
of  Providence,  of  any  period  since  the  departure  of 
Israel  from  the  land  of  Egypt.  If  the  English  colonies 
were  the  only  ones  that  were  capable  of  bettering  their 
condition,  and  that  of  the  world,  by  asserting  and  obtain- 
ing their  liberty,  the  colonies  of  our  country,  now  the 
United  States,  furnish  the  only  instance  of  successful 
rebellion  against  the  power  of  the  English  throne. 

What  effect  the  events  of  this  period  had  on  the  for- 
tune, the  character,  and  the  history  of  the  subject  of  this 
memoir,  we  may  be  unable  fully  to  determine ;  but  it 
will  be  readily  seen,  that  the  most  fondly  cherished 
memorials  of  his  family,  as  of  his  country,  could  not 
fail  of  making  a  deep  impression  on  his  mind,  at  an  early 
age.  That  the  embarrassed  condition  of  his  early  life 
was  the  direct  result  of  the  great  sacrifices  made  by  his 
progenitors,  in  the  struggles  and  sufferings  which  they 
nobly  shared  with  their  contemporaries,  is  equally  evident. 

William's  father,  Captain  William  Miller,  was  in  the 
army  of  the  Revolution.  At  the  time  of  the  evacuation 
of  New  York  by  order  of  Washington,  on  the  invasion 
of  that  city  by  Lord  Howe,  in  August,  1776,  he  was 
confined,  sick  with  fever,  in  the  hospital.  By  rallying 
all  his  strength,  and  the  assistance  he  obtained  from  his 
fellow-soldiers,  he  succeeded  in  leaving  the  city  with  the 
continental  troops.  The  effort,  however,  proved  almost 
fatal.  When  his  companions,  in  the  retiring  movement, 
sought  shelter  in  a  barn,  during  a  storm,  he  was  left 
helpless  under  the  drippings  from  its  roof,  until  his  sad 
condition  moved  the  compassion  of  a  fellow-soldier,  in 
better  health  than  himself,  to  come  to  his  relief.  This 
true  soldier  entered  the  barn ;  he  crowded  together  those 
who  filled  the  already  crowded  floor,  and  thus  made 
room  for  his  almost  dying  comrade,  Miller;   and  then 


4  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    MILLER. 

he  bore  him  gently  to  the  rude  place  of  repose  he  had 
prepared  for  him.  Under  such  circumstances,  the  poor- 
est accommodations  are  enjoyed  with  a  soul-inspiring 
sense  of  comfort,  of  which  those  who  are  in  health, 
among  friends,  secure  from  danger,  and  surrounded  with 
the  luxuries  of  life,  can  form  no  conception. 

With  our  suffering  soldier  the  point  of  danger  appears 
to  have  been  passed,  by  this  timely  assistance  of  his 
friend.  How  much  he  was  afterwards  indebted  to  the 
same,  or  some  other  generous  heart,  we  have  no  recorded 
or  traditionary  testimony  to  inform  us.  He  returned  to 
Pittsfield,  and  was  married  to  Miss  Paulina  Phelps,  on 
the  22d  day  of  March,  1781.  The  family  records  inform 
us  that  he  was  born  December  15th,  1757;  and  that 
Miss  Phelps  was  born  May  1st,  1764. 

Five  years  after  their  marriage,  they  removed  to 
Hampton,  in  the  State  of  New  York,  where  the  survivor 
of  the  dangers  and  hardships  of  the  revolutionary  strug- 
gle was  promoted  to  the  office  of  captain  in  the  militia 
of  that  state.  In  the  last  war  with  England,  he  was  a 
member  of  the  company  called  the  Silver  Grays,  a  vol- 
unteer body,  to  whose  protection  the  public  stores  and 
other  property  at  Whitehall  were  intrusted,  on  the  ap- 
proach of  the  British  army  along  the  shores,  and  of  the 
British  fleet  on  the  waters  of  Lake  Champlain.  As  a  citi- 
zen, the  character  of  Captain  Miller  was  irreproachable. 
He  never  made  a  public  profession  of  religion  ;  but  his 
house  was  often  the  place  to  which  the  neighbors  gathered 
to  hear  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  He  was  taken  away 
suddenly,  with  one  of  his  daughters,  by  the  pestilence 
which  broke  out  in  the  army  at  Burlington,  Vermont, 
and  swept  over  a  considerable  portion  of  the  country, 
with  the  most  terrible  fatality.  He  died  December  30th, 
1812,  three  days  after  his  daughter. 

Captain  Miller's  wife  was  the  daughter  of  Elder  Elna- 
than  Phelps,  a  minister  of  the  Baptist  church,  and  well 
known,  in  his  day,  for  the  plain,  scriptural  character  of 
his  preaching,  through  the  whole  section  of  country 
extending  from  western  Massachusetts,  along  the  line  of 
Vermont  and  New  York,  to  Lake  Champlain.  She  was 
one  of  the  earliest  members  of  the  Baptist  church  formed 
at  Low  Hampton,  then  a  branch  of  the  church  at  Orwell, 


HIS   ANCESTRY.  5 

Vermont,  where  Elder  Phelps  resided.  We  have  the 
most  convincing  evidence  of  the  sterling  character  of  her 
piety;  and  shall  find,  as  we  progress,  another  instance 
to  add  to  the  long  list,  which  the  church  of  God  keeps 
among  her  choicest  memorials,  to  illustrate  the  power  of 
a  Christian  mother's  deportment  and  prayers,  in  recov- 
ering a  gifted  son  from  a  dangerous  position,  and  bring- 
ing him  where  his  powerful  natural  energies,  after  being 
renewed  by  the  spirit  of  God,  would  be  devoted  to  the 
defence  of  the  faith,  and  the  edification  of  the  church. 
Her  death  will  be  noticed  m  another  place. 

Thus  were  blended  in  the  parents  of  William,  as 
their  strongest  traits  of  character,  the  highest  virtues 
which  heaven  and  earth  can  confer  on  man  —  piety  and 
patriotism.  If  patriotism  became  most  conspicuous  to 
the  public  eye,  by  its  exhibition  on  the  field  of  danger 
and  suffering,  where  the  husband  moved,  its  claims  on 
the  comfort  of  the  wife,  in  her  retirement,  were  felt  to  be 
sufficiently  heavy.  And  if  the  mother,  by  her  public 
but  appropriate  profession  of  faith,  made  her  piety  the 
most  noticeable,  the  father  yielded,  at  least,  his  assent 
and  respect  to  that  name  and  service  which  had  won 
the  heart  and  added  to  the  graces  of  William's  mother. 
The  soldier  of  the  Revolution  was  to  lead  his  son  into 
scenes,  and  bring  him  under  a  worldly  discipline,  which 
would  add  to  his  efficiency ;  and  the  camp,  for  a  time, 
would  feel  as  sure  of  his  permanent  attachment  as  it 
was  to  be  proud  of  his  soldierly  honor ;  but  the  disciple 
of  the  cross  would,  at  last,  see  that  son  enlisted  under  a 
different  banner,  to  become  a  leader  of  other  ranks  to  a 
different  warfare,  and  a  different  kind  of  glory ! 

The  calling  of  William's  grandfathers  was  entirely 
different ;  but  there  was  a  remarkable  similarity  in  their 
end.  Elder  Phelps  was  suddenly  attacked,  while  on  a 
journey  from  Orwell  to  Pittsfield,  by  the  army  epidemic  ; 
he  was  found  in  a  dying  state  by  the  wayside,  in  Pow- 
nal,  Vermont,  where  he  soon  after  died,  and  was  buried 
by  the  side  of  their  pastor's  grave,  all  unknown  to  his 
friends  at  home,  till  these  last  acts  of  respect  and  affec- 
tion had  been  completed.  He  is  mentioned  in  "  Bene- 
dict's History  of  the  Baptists,"  (p.  485,)  among  "  the 
first  Baptist  ministers  who  settled  in  Vermont."     This 


6  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM    MILLER. 

took  place  "about  the  year  1780."  He  died  in  peace 
January  2d,  1813.  Of  his  grandfather  Miller,  but  little 
more  is  recollected  than  his  escape  from  death  at  the 
hands  of  the  Indians,  almost  by  miracle,  to  find  a  grave 
among  strangers,  on  his  return  from  the  wars  of  our  colo- 
nial history ;  probably  from  some  one  of  the  ill-advised 
and  unsuccessful  attempts  on  Canada,  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  Revolutionary  War. 

The  traditionary  form  of  his  Indian  adventures  is  to 
this  effect :  —  Somewhere  in  the  western  part  of  Massa- 
chusetts, when  every  exposed  white  settlement  was  pro- 
tected by  a  rude  fort,  the  grandfather  and  several  com- 
panions were  going  to  one  of  them,  probably  to  strengthen 
the  garrison,  and  must  travel  several  miles  by  the  road, 
or  take  a  nearer  route  through  the  wilderness.  Mr. 
Miller  chose  to  take  the  shorter  route,  alone.  He  had 
come  within  hearing  of  the  fort  without  harm,  when  a 
sudden  stirring  of  the  bushes  awakened  his  fears,  and 
he  started  to  run.  At  the  same  instant  the  Indians 
fired  their  muskets,  and  several  balls  passed  through  the 
skirts  of  his  heavy  coat.  He  had  proceeded  but  a  few 
steps  before  he  stumbled  and  fell  to  the  ground ;  but  his 
fall  saved  his  life,  for  the  hatchets  of  the  Indians  passed 
at  the  instant  directly  over  his  head.  His  self-command 
now  returned  ;  he  arose  to  his  feet,  took  aim  at  the  spot 
where  the  savages  were  concealed,  fired,  turned  and  fled. 
The  report  brought  some  of  the  garrison,  including  sev- 
eral friendly  Indians,  to  the  spot.  These  Indians  had 
already  decided  that  the  last  gun  heard  was  that  of  a 
white  man,  and  that  he  had  killed  an  Indian,  for  they 
heard  his  death-yell.  On  repairing  to  the  spot,  marks 
of  blood  were  seen ;  and  these  were  traced  to  a  pond 
near  by,  into  which  it  was  supposed  the  dead  Indian 
was  thrown  by  his  brethren. 

It  is  thought  by  Deacon  Samuel  D.  Colt,  an  aged, 
highly  intelligent,  and  respected  gentleman  of  Pittsfield, 
where  he  has  resided  since  he  was  a  child,  that  this 
incident  is  connected  with  the  history  of  "  Hutchinson's 
Fort,"  so  called  from  the  man  who  built  it,  during  "  the 
second  French  war."  It  was  located  about  two  miles 
west  of  the  village.  Its  site  is  now  covered  by  a  brick 
dwelling-house.    None  of  the  other  forts  were  then  occu- 


CONDITION    OF    THE    FAMILY.  7 

pied.  The  few  inhabitants  of  Pittsfield  nearly  all  left 
the  place  at  the  time,  on  which  account  there  is  an  omis- 
sion in  the  town  records  for  several  years.  Deacon  Colt 
remarked,  on  referring  to  the  adventure,  that  "this  Mil- 
ler was  a  courageous  fellow."  Mr.  Miller  afterwards 
fell  a  victim  to  the  small-pox,  as  before  stated. 

Such,  then,  were  the  family  recollections  and  public 
events  which  were  to  make  the  first  and  deepest  impres- 
sion on  the  strong  intellect  and  generous  heart  of  the 
subject  of  this  memoir. 

When  William's  parents  removed  from  Pittsfield.  in 
1786,  the  section  which  embraced  what  is  now  known 
as  Low  Hampton  was  an  almost  uninhabited  wilder- 
ness,^ The  village  of  Fairhaven  did  not  then  exist. 
And  the  town  of  Whitehall,  now  one  of  the  familiar 
and  important  centres  of  trade  and  travel,  was  marked 
only  by  a  few  rude  dwellings,  the  inhabitants  of  which 
were  in  danger  of  being  crushed  by  the  trees  impending 
from  the  mountain  sides  over  their  heads.  Half  a  dozen, 
or  possibly  half  a  score,  of  farm-houses  were  scattered 
over  the  country,  between  the  southern  extremity  of 
Lake  Champlain  and  Poultney,  Vermont.  But  it  was 
naturally  a  much  more  fertile  and  inviting  country  than 
the  western  part  of  Massachusetts.  William  was  then 
about  four  years  of  age. 

The  farm  selected  by  Mr.  Miller  consisted  of  about  a 
hundred  acres.  It  was  taken  on  a  lease,  for  which 
twenty  bushels  of  wheat  were  to  be  paid  annually. 
The  farm  was  located  near  the  bank  of  Poultney  river, 
about  six  miles  from  the  lake.  After  a  suitable  clear- 
ing had  been  effected,  the  logs  of  the  felled  trees  were 
converted  into  a  dwelling,  and  farming  life  in  the  wil- 
derness, with  its  toils,  privations,  and  hardships,  was 
fairly  begun.  This  was  the  condition  of  things  to  which 
young  William's  lot  consigned  him.  The  difficulties 
with  which  he  had  to  contend  need  not  all  be  enumer- 
ated. 

In  his  early  childhood,  marks  of  more  than  ordinary 
intellectual  strength  and  activity  were  manifested.     A 

#  The  name  then  applied  to  this  section  was  "  Skeenesborough ;  " 
though  its  extent  or  boundaries  do  not  appear  to  have  been  very  defi- 
nite. 


8  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    MILLER. 

few  years  made  these  marks  more  and  more  noticeable 
to  all  who  fell  into  his  society.  But  where  were  the 
powers  of  the  inner  man  to  find  the  nutriment  to  satisfy 
their  cravings,  and  the  field  for  their  exercise  ? 

Besides  the  natural  elements  of  education,  the  objects, 
the  scenes,  and  the  changes  of  the  natural  world,  which 
have  ever  furnished  to  all  truly  great  minds  their  noblest 
aliment,  the  inspiring  historical  recollections  associated 
with  well-known  localities  of  the  neighboring  country. 
and  the  society  of  domestic  life,  there  was  nothing 
within  William's  reach  but  the  Bible,  the  psalter,  and 
prayer-book,  till  he  had  resided  at  Low  Hampton  sev- 
eral years.  But  were  ever  such  natural  scenery  and 
such  historical  associations  before  blended  together  in 
so  confined  a  circle  ? 

A  few  rods  behind  and  west  of  the  log  house,  the 
level  which  began  at  the  bank  of  the  river  was  broken 
by  one  of  those  natural  terraces  which  mark  so  often 
the  long  slopes  of  the  outspread  valleys  of  our  country. 
From  this  beautiful  elevation,  a  forest  scene  might  be 
witnessed,  at  the  return  of  every  autumn,  that  was  so 
rich  in  its  variegated  beauties,  and  covered  so  extended 
a  field,  that  it  could  not  fail  to  entrance  the  soul  of  even 
an  ordinary  lover  of  nature,  on  beholding  it. 

From  the  summit  of  the  sharp  mountainous  ridge, 
half  a  mile  further  west,  there  was  spread  out  before 
the  eye  a  view  as  captivating  by  its  grandeur  as  that 
from  the  lowlier  position  was  by  its  beauty.  The  ex- 
tent of  country  seen  from  this  higher  point  was  not  less 
than  fifty  miles  from  north  to  south,  while  it  stretched 
away  easterly  to  the  Green  Mountains,  the  distant  out- 
line of  which,  including  some  of  the  higher  peaks, 
seemed  to  rest  against  the  sky. 

Sometimes  a  dense,  motionless  sea  of  vapor  spread 
over  the  low  plain,  through  which  the  hill-tops  rose  up 
like  islands,  and  to  which  the  neighboring  mountain 
sides  seemed  to  form  the  coast.  From  the  wide-spread 
surface  of  this  mimic  sea,  the  smoke  of  the  scattered 
farm-houses  arose,  and,  as  it  became  chilled  in  the  air 
above,  turned  and  sunk  into  the  vapory  bed,  very  much 
in  the  form,  but  not  with  the  force,  of  the  water  spouted 
by  a  whale  in  the  ocean.     Again,  the  rising  smoke  from 


INTERESTING    LOCALITIES.  9 

the  farm-house,  the  coal-pit,  and  from  masses  of  burn- 
ing wood,  when  it  reached  an  atmospheric  line  the 
temperature  or  density  of  which  refused  it  an  upward 
passage,  slowly  formed  itself  into  an  upper  cloudy  stra- 
tum, which  connected  the  higher  hill-tops  as  by  an 
extended  magic  bridge.  And  sometimes  the  storm 
clouds  swept  along  these  mountain  sides  in  their  wildest 
and  most  imposing  grandeur,  the  sure  precursors  of  a 
sudden  squall  or  tempest ;  and  perhaps  the  spell-bound 
observer  would  not  have  time  to  reach  the  warm  but 
rude  cabin-door  before  the  descending  rain  or  snow 
would  shut  out  every  object  but  the  ground  beneath  his 
feet. 

Bears,  wolves,  and  other  dangerous  wild  animals, 
which  had  formerly  abounded  through  the  whole  region, 
at  this  time  usually  kept  among  the  unfrequented 
recesses  of  the  mountains.  But  occasionally,  during  the 
severity  of  winter,  when  the  wolves  were  pressed  by 
hunger,  their  howlings  disturbed  the  repose  of  the  set- 
tler, if  they  did  not  inflict  a  more  serious  injury,  by  the 
destruction  of  his  flock.  And,  one  night,  William's 
mother  was  out  near  their  residence,  and  seeing  what 
she  supposed  was  one  of  their  domestic  animals,  she 
approached  it,  and,  as  she  was  about  extending  her 
hand  towards  it,  was  very  soon  informed  of  her  mistake, 
by  the  frightful  growl  of  a  bear. 

From  the  earliest  times  reached  by  history  or  tradi- 
tion, Lake  Champlain,  and  the  natural  landing-places 
which  open  into  the  country  on  its  southern  extremity, 
seem  to  have  been  the  chosen  thoroughfare  for  the  native 
savages  in  their  migrations,  for  the  savages  and  the 
French  in  their  warlike  expeditions  against  the  English 
colonists  on  the  Atlantic,  and  afterwards  for  the  British 
in  their  wars  with  the  revolutionary  colonies  and  the 
United  States.  The  scenes  of  savage  cruelty,  of  patri- 
otic daring  and  ordinary  war,  which  have  marked  the 
face  of  the  earth  along  that  chosen  highway,  had  well- 
nigh  ended  when  William  was  born.  But  nearly  every 
mile  between  Quebec  and  Albany  had  been  a  battle- 
ground; and  many  a  spot,  from  Canada  along  the  moun- 
tain passes  of  northern  New  York,  Vermont,  and  western 
Massachusetts,  was  known  as  the  scene  of  some  terrible 
Indian  tragedy. 


10  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

Only  about  two  miles  below  his  fathers  residence,  on 
the  river  near  the  banks  of  which  it  stood,  are  "  Carver's 
Falls.'7  one  of  the  most  romantic  localities  in  our  coun- 
try. Directly  below  the  falls  is  a  broad,  oblong  basin, 
which  connects  with  the  lake,  the  precipitous  sides  of 
which  were  formerly  hung  with  a  thick  growth  of  hem- 
locks. Some  of  the  most  fatal  expeditions  of  the  sav- 
ages, against  the  frontier  settlements  of  New  England. 
were  carried  on  by  parties  who  ascended  the  river  from 
the  lake  to  this  basin,  there  secreting  their  canoes  under 
the  dark  evergreen  branches  of  the  hemlock  trees  :  and 
then,  threading  their  way  secretly  to  the  dwellings  of  the 
English,  would  seize  their  captives,  or  take  the  scalps 
of  the  murdered  inhabitants,  and  return  to  their  canoes. 
Here,  in  this  secluded  hiding-place,  the  danger  was  all 
over. 

Just  across  the  lake  were  Ticonderoga.  Crown  Point, 
and  Lake  George.  Within  the  limits  of  the  view  before 
mentioned,  to  the  south,  were  Fort  Edward  and  Fort 
William  Henry ;  and,  a  little  further  distant,  were  Sara- 
toga and  Bennington.  Of  these  names  we  need  not  speak. 

This  is  the  scenery,  and  these  are  the  recollections, 
which  entered  largely  into  William's  early  education. 
He  was  not,  however,  entirely  destitute  of  other  re- 
sources. 

In  a  newly  settled  country,  the  public  means  of  edu- 
cation must  necessarily  be  very  limited.  This  was  the 
case,  at  the  time  here  referred  to,  in  a  much  greater 
degree  than  it  usually  is  with  the  new  settlements  of  the 
present  day.  The  schoolhouse  was  not  erected  in  season 
to  afford  the  children  of  Low  Hampton  but  three  months' 
schooling  in  winter,  during  William's  schoolboy  days. 
His  mother  had  taught  him  to  read,  so  that  he  soon 
mastered  the  few  books  belonging  to  the  family :  and 
this  prepared  him  to  enter  the  "senior  class''  when  the 
district  school  opened.  But  if  the  terms  were  short, 
the  winter  nights  were  long.  Pine  knots  could  be  made 
to  supply  the  want  of  candles,  lamps,  or  gas.  And  the 
spacious  fireplace  hi  the  log  house  was  ample  enough 
as  a  substitute  for  the  schoolhouse  and  lecture-room. 
But  even  the  enjoyment  of  these  literary  advantages 
subjected  the  zealous  student  to  a  somewhat  severe  dis- 
cipline. 


INGENIOUS    EXPEDIENTS.  11 

The  settlers  generally  on  our  frontiers  are  under  the 
necessity  of  exercising  the  most  stringent  economy  in 
the  use  of  everything  which  takes  money  out,  or  brings 
money  in.  The  most  moderate  liberality  in  the  scale 
of  living  is  often  as  ruinous  to  their  prospects  as  indo- 
lence, intemperance,  disease  or  death,  could  be.  Many 
a  hardy  farmer,  or  his  widow  and  children,  have  been 
compelled  to  give  up  their  claim  to  the  spot  on  which 
they  had  settled,  just  as  it  began  to  afford  a  comfortable 
subsistence,  simply  because  they  had  not  the  means  at 
command  to  lift  the  mortgage.  There  are  always  human 
sharks  enough  to  devour  all  they  can.  And  woe  be  to 
those  who  are  at  the  mercy  of  the  common  mortgage- 
holder  !  Such  were  the  circumstances  of  William's 
parents  that  they  had  a  plain  question  to  settle :  with 
health,  hard  labor,  sobriety  and  economy,  the  farm  they 
had  cleared  might  become  their  own,  to  leave  to  their 
children ;  the  absence  of  any  one  of  these  items,  in  the 
condition  of  success,  was  sure  to  make  it  otherwise.  It 
was  on  this  view  of  the  case  that  William's  parents 
declined  to  provide  him  with  candles  to  read  by ;  and 
this  led  to  the  expedient  of  the  pine  knots. 

There  is  an  amusing  and  truly  affecting  incident 
connected  with  his  application  of  this  means  for  getting 
light,  which  shows  how  deeply  his  soul  was  bound  up 
in  his  books,  since  an  offence  on  that  interest  only  could 
arouse  his  combativeness  to  commit  an  overt  act.  He 
was  accustomed  to  select  pine  stumps  of  the  proper  qual- 
ity for  his  candle-wood,  chop  them  into  a  size  and  shape 
convenient  for  use,  and  then  put  these  pieces  into  a  place 
he  had  appropriated  for  that  purpose,  so  that,  when  his 
hours  for  reading  came,  he  would  have  nothing  to  do 
but  light  up.  One  day,  when  a,  sister  of  his,  who  is 
now  living,  had  some  of  her  little  friends  to  visit  her, 
she  had  some  difficulty  in  kindling  the  fire,  and,  as 
William's  pitch- wood  was  handy,  she  made  use  of  that. 
The  trespass  was  soon  discovered  by  him ;  and  so  great 
was  the  provocation,  he  lost  all  self-command,  and  gave 
her  a  smart  blow.  It  was  the  only  one  that  sister  ever 
received  from  him. 

Another  difficulty  called  for  another  expedient.  As 
soon  as  William's  age  and  strength  rendered  him  able 
2# 


12  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    MILLER. 

to  assist  his  father  about  the  farm,  it  was  feared  that  his 
reading  by  night  might  interfere  with  his  efficiency  in 
the  work  of  the  day.  His  father  insisted,  therefore,  that 
he  should  retire  to  bed  when  he  retired  himself.  But 
the  boy  could  not  be  kept  in  bed.  "When  the  other 
members  of  the  family  were  all  asleep.  "William  would 
leave  his  bed.  then  find  his  way  to  the  pitch-wood,  go 
to  the  fireplace,  cast  himself  down  flat  on  the  hearth, 
with  his  book  before  him.  thrust  his  pitch- wood  into  the 
embers  till  it  blazed  well,  and  there  spend  the  hours  of 
midnight  in  reading.  If  the  blaze  grew  dim.  he  would 
hold  the  stick  in  the  embers  till  the  heat  fried  the  pitch 
out  of  the  wood,  which  renewed  the  blaze.  And  when 
he  had  read  as  long  as  he  dared  to.  or  finished  his  book. 
he  would  find  his  way  back  to  bed  again,  with  as  little 
noise  as  possible. 

But  he  came  near  losing  even  this  privilege.  His 
father  awoke  one  night,  and  seeing  the  light  of  Wil- 
liam's burning  stick,  he  supposed  the  house  was  on  fire. 
He  hurried  from  his  bed.  and  when  he  saw  his  son's 
position  and  employment,  he  seized  the  whip,  and  pur- 
suing his  flying  son.  cried  out,  in  a  manner  which  made 
it  effectual  for  some  time,  "  Bill,  if  you  don't  §o  to  bed. 
I'll  horsewhip  you  !  " 

The  reader  may  wish  to  be  informed  where  the  books 
were  obtained  under  such  embarrassments.  The  first 
addition  made  to  those  belonging  to  the  family,  already 
named,  was  the  History  of  Crusoe!  The  remains  of 
this  volume  are  still  preserved.  Its  title-page  reads  as 
follows  :  — 

"  The  Wonderful  Life  and  Surprising  Adventures  of 
the  Renowned  Hero.  Robinson  Crusoe,  who  lived  twenty- 
eight  years  on  an  uninhabited  island,  which  he  after- 
wards colonized.  Albany  :  Published  by  C.  R.  and  G. 
Webster.  State  Street,     iedccxc." 

It  is  evidently  an  imitation  or  abridgment  of  Defoe. 
But  how  many  longings  of  soul,  how  many  plans,  and 
entreaties,  on  the  part  of  the  boy.  preceded  the  pos- 
session of  that  book  !  At  length,  his  father  granted  him 
permission  to  purchase  the  book,  if  he  would  earn  the 
money  by  chopping  wood  during  his  leisure  hours. 
The  prize  was  soon  in  his  hands.     The  second  book  he 


PERSONAL    TRAITS.  13 

possessed  was  The  Adventures  of  Robert  Boyle,  Other 
books  were  loaned  him  by  gentlemen  in  the  vicinity, 
who  had  become  interested  in  his  improvement ;  among 
whom  were  Dr.  Witherill*  and  Col.  Lyon,f  of  Fair- 
haven,  and  Esquire  Cruikshanks, %  of  Whitehall. 

All  this,  however,  only  afforded  a  partial  gratifica- 
tion to  the  inward  desire  for  knowledge.  But  what 
could  he  do  ?  His  father  could  render  him  but  little  aid 
if  he  had  been  disposed  to  aid  him.  And,  if  he  felt  that 
his  son  must  be  denied  even  the  trifling  accommodations 
we  have  noticed,  it  must  be  seen  that  he  would  not 
readily  favor  a  more  liberal  outlay  for  that  son's  ben- 
efit. There  were  then  no  amply  endowed  literary  in- 
stitutions, or  zealous  educational  societies,  standing  with 
open  doors  and  open  arms  to  receive  every  promising  or 
unpromising  young  man  who  might  aspire  to  the  hon- 
ors, or  the  substantial  benefits,  of  a  liberal  education. 
Was  there  any  source  then  from  which  help  might 
come  ?  Some,  no  doubt,  would  consider  it  a  cause  of 
grief  that  more  ample  means  were  not  within  the  reach 
of  young  William  Miller.  Viewing  the  case  in  some  of 
its  bearings,  we  could  sympathize  with  them.  In  an- 
other view,  we  might  not.  Nothing  could  have  been 
more  gratifying  to  him  than  the  attainment  of  means 
for  an  education ;  and  his  gratification,  or  that  of  any 
other,  in  itself,  we  should  approve.  And  certain  it  is, 
that  a  more  promising  or  worthy  subject  of  the  most 
generous  appropriations  could  rarely  be  found. 

He  possessed  a  strong  physical  constitution,  an  active 
and  naturally  well-developed  intellect,  and  an  irreproach- 
able moral  character.  He  had  appropriated  to  his  use 
and  amusement  the  small  stock  of  literature  afforded  by 
the  family,  while  a  child.  He  had  enjoyed  the  limited 
advantages  of  the  district  school  but  a  few  years,  before 
it  was  generally  admitted  that  his  attainments  exceeded 
those  of  the  teachers  usually  employed.  He  had  drunk 
in  the  inspiration  of  the  natural  world  around  him,  and 

*  James  Witherill.  After  this  time,  referred  to  in  the  text,  he  was 
Judge  of  Michigan  Territory. 

t  Hon.  Matthew  Lyon.  Member  of  Congress  from  Vermont,  from 
1794  to  1798. 

%  Alexander  Cruikshanks,  Esq.     He  was  formerly  from  Scotland. 


14  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    3IILLEK. 

of  the  most  exciting  events  in  his  country's  history.  His 
imagination  had  been  quickened,  and  his  heart  warmed. 
by  the  adventures  and  gallantries  of  fiction,  and  his 
intellect  enriched  by  history.  And  some  of  his  earliest 
efforts  with  the  pen.  as  well  as  the  testimony  of  his 
associates,  show  that  his  mind  and  heart  were  ennobled 
by  the  lessons,  if  not  by  the  spirit  and  power,  of  religion. 

What.  now.  would  have  been  the  effect  of  what  is 
called  a  regular  course  of  education  ?  Would  it  have 
perverted  him,  as  it  has  thousands  ?  or  would  it  have 
made  him  instrumental  of  greater  good  in  the  cause  of 
God  ?  Would  it  have  performed  its  appropriate  work, 
that  of  disciplining,  enlarging,  and  furnishing  the  mind, 
leaving  unimpaired  by  the  process  its  natural  energies. 
its  sense  of  self-dependence  as  to  man.  and  its  sense  of 
dependence  and  accountability  as  to  God }  or  would  it 
have  placed  him  in  the  crowded  ranks  of  those  who  are 
content  to  share  in  the  honor  of  repeating  the  twaddle. 
true  or  false,  which  passes  for  truth  in  the  school  or 
sect  which  has  "made  them  what  they  are"]  We 
think  it  would  have  been  difficult  to  pervert  him ;  but 
where  so  many  who  have  been  regarded  as  highly  prom- 
ising have  been  marred  by  the  operation,  he  would  have 
been  in  great  danger.  He  might  have  become  externally 
a  better  subject  for  the  artist :  but  we  doubt  if  he  would 
have  been  a  better  subject  to  be  used  as  an  instrument 
of  Providence.  There  are  those  who  survive  the  regu- 
lar course  uninjured.  There  are  those  who  are  bene- 
fited by  it  so  far  as  to  be  raised  to  a  level  with  people  of 
ordinary  capacity,  which  they  never  could  attain  with- 
out special  aid.  And  there  is  a  third  class,  who  are  a 
stereotype  representation  of  what  the  course  makes 
them  :  if  they  raise  a  fellow-man  out  of  the  mire,  they 
never  get  him  nearer  to  heaven  than  the  school  where 
they  were  educated. 

Whatever  might  have  been  the  result  of  any  estab- 
lished course  of  education,  in  the  case  of  William  Mil- 
ler, such  a  course  was  beyond  his  reach :  he  was  de- 
prived of  the  benefit,  he  has  escaped  the  perversion. 
Let  us  be  satisfied.  But  still  we  must  record  the  fact, 
that  it  would  have  been  extremely  gratifying,  if  some- 
thing of  the  kind  could  have  been  placed  at  his  command. 


PLANS    FOR    HIS    EDUCATION.  15 

He  desired  it.  He  longed  for  it  with  an  intensity  of 
feeling  that  approached  to  agony.  He  pondered  the 
question  over  and  over,  whether  it  was  possible  to  accom- 
plish what  appeared  to  him  to  be  not  only  a  desirable 
gratification  and  honor,  but  almost  essential  to  his  exist- 
ence. 

It  should  be  noticed,  however,  that  his  circumstances 
became  somewhat  relieved  as  he  advanced  in  years. 
The  log  house  had  given  place  to  a  comfortable  frame 
house;  and,  in  this,  William  had  a  room  he  was  per- 
mitted to  call  his  own.  He  had  means  to  provide  him- 
self with  a  new  book,  occasionally,  and  with  candles  to 
read  at  night,  so  that  he  could  enjoy  his  chosen  luxury, 
during  his  leisure  hours,  in  comparative  comfort. 

It  was  on  one  of  those  times  of  leisure  that  an  inci- 
dent occurred  which  marked  a  new  era  in  his  history, 
though  it  did  not  introduce  fully  such  an  era  as  he 
desired. 

There  was  a  medical  gentleman  in  the  vicinity  of  his 
residence,  by  the  name  of  Smith,  who  possessed  an  ample 
fortune,  and  was  known  to  be  very  liberal.  In  the 
plans  which  had  passed  through  the  mind  of  William, 
to  secure  the  means  of  maturing  his  education,  he  had 
thought  of  Dr.  Smith.  At  any  rate,  it  could  do  no 
harm  to  apply  to  him.  The  plan  was  carried  so  far  as 
to  write  a  letter,  setting  forth  to  that  gentleman  his 
intense  desires,  his  want  of  means  to  gratify  them,  his 
hopes  and  his  prospects,  if  successful. 

The  letter  was  nearly  ready  to  be  sent  to  its  destina- 
tion, when  William's  father  entered  the  room,  which  we 
may  properly  call  his  son's  study.  Perhaps  it  had  not  oc- 
curred to  the  son  to  consult  his  father  in  the  matter:  and 
to  have  it  come  to  his  notice  hi  so  unexpected  a  manner 
somewhat  disturbed  him  for  the  moment.  But  there 
was  the  letter  in  his  father's  presence.  He  took  it,  and 
read  it.  It  affected  him  deeply.  For  the  first  time,  he 
seemed  to  feel  his  worldly  condition  to  be  uncomfortable, 
on  his  son's  account.  He  wanted  to  be  rich  then,  for 
the  gratification  of  his  son,  more  than  for  any  other 
human  being.  There  were  the  irrepressible  yearnings 
of  his  first-born,  which  he  had  treated  in  their  childish 
development  as  an  annoyance,  now  spread  out  in  manly 


16  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    3IILLER. 

but  impassioned  pleadings  to  a  comparative  stranger  to 
afford  him  help  !  There  were  plans  and  hopes  for  the 
future,  marked  by  an  exhibition  of  judgment  and  honor 
that  could  not  fail  of  commanding  attention  !  All  that 
was  tender  in  that  fathers  heart,  all  that  was  generous 
in  the  soldier,  and  all  that  could  make  him  ambitious  of 
a  worthy  successor,  was  moved  by  that  letter.  The 
tears  fell,  and  words  of  sympathy  were  spoken:  but  the 
plan  was  impossible. 

The  letter  of  William  was  never  sent.  It  had  the 
effect,  however,  of  changing  his  father's  course  towards 
him.  so  that  he  was  rather  encouraged  than  hindered  m 
his  favorite  pursuits. 

By  this  time,  the  natural  genius  and  attainments  of 
young  William  Miller  had  distinguished  him  among  his 
associates.  To  the  young  folks,  he  became  a  sort  of 
scribbler-general.  If  any  one  wanted  "  verses  made/"5 
a  letter  to  send,  some  ornamental  and  symbolic  design 
to  be  interpreted  by  "the  tender  passion/'"  or  anything 
which  required  extra  taste  and  fancy  in  the  use  of  the 
pen.  it  was  pretty  sure  to  be  planned,  if  not  executed, 
by  him. 

Some  of  these  first-fruits  of  his  genius  are  still  in  ex- 
istence :  and.  although  it  requires  no  critic  to  discover 
that  he  had  never  received  lessons  of  any  of  the  "  great 
masters."'  still  these  productions  would  compare  very 
favorably  with  similar  efforts  by  those  whose  advan- 
tages have  been  far  superior  to  his. 

The  facts  connected  with  the  early  life  of  Mr.  Wil- 
liam Miller,  and  the  incidents  in  his  personal  history, 
now  spread  before  the  readers  of  this  work,  will  enable 
them  to  see.  in  the  boy.  a  type  of  the  future  man.  The 
most  embarrassing  circumstances  of  his  condition  could 
not  master  his  perseverance.  And  if  he  could  not  accom- 
plish all  he  desired  to.  the  success  which  attended  his 
efforts,  in  spite  of  great  discouragements,  was  truly  sur- 
prising. The  position  he  had  won  opened  to  him  a 
fairer  prospect,  though  still  surrounded  with  serious  dan- 
gers. But  the  features  of  the  next  step  in  his  history 
must  be  the  subject  of  another  chapter. 


CHAPTER  II. 

MARRIAGE    AND   PUBLIC    LIFE. 

The  successful  military  operations  in  behalf  of  the 
northern  colonies  of  our  country  resulted,  at  the  close  of 
the  Revolutionary  War,  in  opening  the  whole  territory 
along  the  northern  frontier  of  the  New  England  States 
and  New  York,  for  the  occupancy  of  the  immigrant ; 
and  gave  security  in  prosecuting  the  business  of  peace- 
ful life.  The  desire  of  possessing  a  home  in  this  new, 
healthy,  and  fertile  region,  which  led  so  many  families 
from  western  Massachusetts  —  the  Miller  family  among 
them  —  induced  other  families  from  the  Atlantic  settle- 
ments, particularly  in  Rhode  Island  and  Connecticut,  to 
try  their  fortunes  in  the  same  region. 

Among  the  families  which  came  from  Connecticut 
about  the  time  that  the  Miller  family  came  from  Pitts- 
field,  there  was  one  by  the  name  of  Smith.  This  fam- 
ily settled  in  Poultney,  Vermont,  some  half  a  dozen 
miles  from  the  residence  of  Mr.  Miller.  The  Smiths 
were  related  to  families  in  the  Miller  neighborhood,  and 
this  brought  the  members  of  the  two  families  into  each 
other's  society.  It  was  in  this  way  that  the  subject  of 
this  memoir  first  met  with  Miss  Lucy  Smith,  a  young 
woman  of  about  his  own  age,  who  afterwards  became 
his  wife. 

There  certainly  is  no  relation  which  two  human 
beings  can  sustain  to  each  other,  on  which  their  mutual 
welfare  so  much  depends,  as  that  of  husband  and  wife. 
To  a  great  extent,  their  history,  and  that  of  their  chil- 
dren, are  determined  by  the  fitness  of  the  parties  for  each 
other,  and  the  manner  in  which  the  relation  is  sustained. 
If  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God  are  seen  in  the  insti- 
tution of  marriage,  these  attributes  are  quite  as  manifest 
in  the  philosophical,  inartificial,  and  religious  manner  in 
which  he  requires  the  institution  to  be  honored.     We 


18  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    MILLER. 

shall  see,  by  and  by,  that  the  importance  of  the  duties 
growing  out  of  this  relation  was  a  principal  consideration 
in  fixing  Mr.  Miller's  purpose  to  become  a  Christian. 

As  Mrs.  Lucy  Miller  is  now  living,  all  that  might  be 
said  to  her  praise  may  not  be  said  here.  It  is  sufficient 
to  state,  that  she  was  remarkably  endowed,  by  nature  and 
by  her  industrial  and  economical  habits,  to  make  domes- 
tic life  highly  agreeable,  and  to  favor  Mr.  Miller's  pro- 
motion and  success  in  the  departments  of  public  life  in 
which  he  was  called  to  move.  And  few  men  could  be 
better  adapted  to  enjoy,  or  better  qualified  to  honor,  the 
office  of  a  husband,  than  Mr.  Miller.  His  warm-hearted 
and  tireless  sociability  gave  itself  full  play  in  the  domes- 
tic circle:  and  his  confidence  was  unbounded  towards 
those  whom  he  had  decided  to  be  worthy  of  it.  The 
discernment  which  led  Miss  Smith  to  accept  the  offer  of 
his  hand  was  never  called  in  question  by  a  disappoint- 
ment of  her  expectations.  They  were  united  in  marriage 
June  29th,  1803. 

By  comparing  dates,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  subject 
of  this  memoir  had  passed  his  minority  but  a  few  months 
when  this  important  change  in  his  condition  in  life  took 
place.  Shortly  afterwards,  the  new-made  family  set- 
tled in  Poultney,  Vermont,  where  the  young  wife's 
parents  resided. 

To  the  population  generally,  Mr.  Miller  was  a  stran- 
ger ;  and  to  those  who  knew  him  as  the  fortunate  hus- 
band of  one  of  the  promising  young  ladies  of  the  village, 
nothing  very  remarkable  appeared  in  him,  to  attract 
their  attention.  In  fact,  he  does  not  appear  to  have 
been,  at  that  time,  or  during  his  subsequent  life,  either 
moved  by  external  show  in  others,  or  led  to  make  the 
least  show  to  produce  an  effect  on  others.  What  was 
solid  and  unaffectedly  natural  and  true  was  all  he  val- 
ued, or  wished  others  to  value,  as  worthy  of  their  atten- 
tion. He  had  been  distinguished  by  no  other  public 
honors,  we  believe,  prior  to  his  leaving  Low  Hampton, 
but  that  of  being  promoted  to  the  always  dignified  office 
of  serjeant  in  the  militia.  However,  he  continued  in 
Poultney  but  a  short  time  before  it  began  to  be  perceived 
that  his  natural  genius  would  make  itself  felt,  if  it  did 
not  seek  to  make  itself  seen. 


HYMN    FOR    INDEPENDENCE.  19 

One  of  the  first  objects  of  his  interest,  after  he  had 
become  settled,  was  the  village  library.  His  constant 
use  of  its  volumes  brought  him  into  the  society  of  a  supe- 
rior class  of  men.  His  wife  took  a  deep  interest  in  his 
improvement  and  promotion :  and  made  it  her  pleasure 
and  business  to  relieve  him  as  much  as  possible  from  all 
the  family  cares  which  might  call  him  away  from  his 
books.  She  felt  very  sure  that  it  would  not  be  lost  time 
on  his  part,  or  lost  labor  on  her  own  part.  Still,  the 
time  he  could  devote  to  books,  on  the  best  possible  arrange- 
ment, was  not  so  much  as  he  desired :  for  he  had  been 
trained  to  the  farming  business,  and  he  made  that  his 
employment,  for  some  years,  in  Poultney. 

One  effort  of  genius,  though  trifling  in  itself,  which 
attracted  towards  him  the  public  attention  of  the  village 
and  its  vicinity,  was  a  poetic  effusion,  the  inspiration  of 
his  patriotic  ardor.  Preparations  were  going  on,  at  the 
time,  for  the  public  celebration  of  the  anniversary  of  our 
national  independence  :  and  the  inspiration  of  that  mem- 
orable day  seized  Mr.  Miller  while  he  was  hoeing  corn 
in  the  field.  He  had  written  poetry  before ;  and  so,  after 
the  labor  of  the  field  was  done,  he  put  his  thoughts  into 
a  written  form,  to  be  adapted  to  the  familiar  old  tune, 
called  "Delight." 

The  appointed  marshal,  or  manager,  of  the  services 
of  the  day,  was  Esquire  Ashley,  who  was  then  a  neigh- 
bor of  Mr.  Miller,  and  afterwards  became  an  intimate 
friend.  But  the  poet  of  the  day,  as  he  became,  was  too 
reserved  to  offer  his  tribute,  though  there  is  reason  to 
believe  it  would  have  been  thankfully  accepted ;  for  the 
business  of  the  manager  hardly  afforded  him  time  to 
write  poetry  for  the  occasion,  if  he  had  the  ability,  or 
even  to  select  it.  Mr.  Miller  was  willing  to  have  his 
piece  seen  and  used,  if  it  was  thought  to  be  suitable,  but 
he  could  not  announce  himself  as  its  author.  So  he 
took  the  manuscript,  and  walked  as  usual  to  Esquire 
Ashley's  house.  He  seated  himself  leisurely  below  the 
chamber  window,  where  that  gentleman  was  making 
his  preparations  for  the  great  celebration.  Then,  taking 
an  opportunity  to  place  it  near  where  Mrs.  Ashley  was 
at  work,  he  shortly  after  withdrew.  As  soon  as  Mrs. 
Ashley  discovered  the  paper,  she  took  it  to  her  husband, 

3 


20  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM   MILLER. 

supposing  it  was  one  of  his  papers  which  had  fallen 
from  the  window.  He  took  it,  and  read  the  hymn :  it 
struck  him  as  being  just  what  was  wanted ;  but  he 
knew  nothing  of  its  origin.  It  was  carried  to  several 
others,  who  were  thought  of,  as  its  author,  but  no  au- 
thor or  owner  of  it  could  be  found.  "  Perhaps  an  angel 
from  heaven  had  sent  it !  "     So  they  talked,  at  any  rate. 

However,  the  hymn  was  copied  with  the  pen,  and 
the  sheets  multiplied  to  supply  all  who  wished  for  one. 
The  day  came,  and  the  hymn  was  sung,  with  the  great- 
est enthusiasm,  to  the  favorite  old  tune,  "  Delight  "! 

But  among  those  who  distributed  the  copies,  there 
was  a  worthy  Baptist  minister,  by  the  name  of  Kendrick, 
who  had  taken  a  warm  interest  in  Mr.  Miller.  His  sus- 
picions had  pointed  him  to  the  author  of  the  piece ;  and 
when  Mr.  Miller  came,  with  others,  to  get  a  copy,  his 
appearance  and  manner  confirmed  Elder  Kendrick' s  sus- 
picions. Further  inquiry  brought  forth  a  confession  of 
authorship.  To  use  the  phrase  of  the  old  folks,  "  it  was 
a  great  feather  in  his  cap."  He  had  touched  the  right 
chord  in  the  right  way.  The  pious  and  patriotic  emo- 
tions of  the  aged  were  revived ;  the  ardent  responses  of 
the  young  to  these  parental  emotions  found  expression 
in  the  new  hymn ;  and  nothing  more  was  needed,  to 
make  its  author  the  popular  favorite ! 

It  is  not  known  that  an  entire  copy  of  the  hymn  is 
now  in  existence.  A  sister  of  its  author  has  repeated 
to  us  a  few  of  the  stanzas,  which  we  give,  more  for  the 
purpose  of  exhibiting  his  religious  and  patriotic  senti- 
ments than  from  an  expectation  that  our  readers  will  be 
affected  as  were  those  who  first  heard  it.  Its  style  and 
metre  were  strictly  in  accordance  with  the  standard 
contained  in  the  hymn-book  used  on  Sundays,  doubtless 
the  only  standard  the  writer  of  it  was  familiar  with ; 
and  the  effect  arose  from  the  natural  force  and  simplic- 
ity of  the  versified  thoughts,  and  the  perfect  ease  of 
the  musical  execution.     But  to  the  fragments   of  the 

hymn :  — 

#       #       #       #       #  • 

"  Our  Independence  dear, 
Bought  with  the  price  of  blood, 
Let  us  receive  with  care, 
And  trust  our  Maker,  God. 


POLITICAL    CHARACTER.  21 

For  he  's  the  tower 

To  which  we  fly  ; 

His  grace  is  nigh 
In  every  hour ! 

Cl  Nor  shall  Columbia's  sons 
Forget  the  price  it  cost, 
As  long  as  water  runs, 

Or  leaves  are  nipped  by  frost. 
Freedom  is  thine  ; 
Let  millions  rise, 
Defend  the  prize 
Through  rolling  time  ! 
*         #         #         #         # 
"  There  was  a  Washington, 
A  man  of  noble  fame, 
Who  led  Columbia's  sons 
To  battle  on  the  plain  ; 
With  skill  they  fought ; 
The  British  host, 
With  all  their  boast, 
Soon  came  to  nought ! 
#        #        #        *        # 

"  Let  traitors  hide  their  heads, 
And  party  quarrels  cease  ; 
Our  foes  are  struck  with  dread. 
When  we  declare  for  peace, 
Firm  let  us  be, 
And  rally  round 
The  glorious  sound 
Of  liberty!  " 

The  reader  will  see  that  the  piece  was  designed  for 
home  consumption.  It  was  exactly  suited  to  the  occa- 
sion ;  and  was  marked  throughout,  in  spirit,  style,  and 
thought,  with  the  elements  of  his  education.  And  this 
production,  with  others  in  prose  and  poetry,  made  him 
at  once  a  notable  in  the  community ;  secured  to  him  a 
wide  circle  of  friends,  and  opened  the  way  for  his  pro- 
motion to  office  and  honor.  The  old  men  were  all  ready 
to  give  him  a  lift,  almost  without  distinction  of  "  party." 
The  young  folks  made  his  house  a  place  of  common 
resort,  to  which  they  gathered  to  spend  their  leisure 
hours;  while  himself  and  wife  became  the  central  unit 
which  drew  them  together,  and  kept  all  in  motion. 

It  was  here  that  Mr.  Miller  became  a  member  of  the 
Masonic  fraternity,  in  which  his  perseverance,  if  nothing 
else,  was  manifested;  for  he  advanced  to  the  highest 


22  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    MILLER. 

degree  which  the  lodges  then  in  the  country,  or  in  thai 
region,  could  confer. 

In  his  political  sentiments,  he  was  decidedly  dem- 
ocratic. But  he  had  intelligence  enough  to  see  that  the 
practical  patriotism  of  men  did  not  depend  so  much  on 
the  party  name  they  took  as  on  their  common  sense  and 
integrity.  He  knew  that  there  were  bad  men  enough  in 
either  party  to  ruin  the  country,  if  they  had  the  power 
to  do  it :  and  good  men  enough  in  the  same  parties  to 
promote  the  public  prosperity  to  the  best  of  their  abil- 
ity. His  position,  therefore,  was  taken  in  view  of  the 
tendency  of  different  political  principles  and  public  meas- 
ures, in  their  ultimate  bearing  on  the  established  insti- 
tutions of  the  country.  He  enjoyed,  in  a  remarkable 
degree,  the  confidence  of  both  the  political  parties  of 
the  day. 

The  first  public  office  of  a  civil  character  to  which 
he  was  elected  or  appointed  was  that  of  constable.  His 
appointment  to  the  office  of  sheriff  took  place  in  1S09. 
The  first  entry  of  -writs  served/'7  and  of  "execu- 
tions levied,  as  sheriff's  deputy,7'  is  dated  '-'December 
6th,  1S09.77  A  long  list  of  writs  and  executions  is  still 
preserved,  in  good  condition,  in  a  book  used  for  that 
purpose.  The  last  writ  in  this  list  is  dated  1S11  ;*  the 
last  execution  is  closed  up  in  ':  May,  1S13.77  The  names 
of  the  attorneys  which  occur  the  most  frequently,  in  the 
issuing  of  these  writs,  are  "R:  C.  Mallory,  Esq.77  and 
"  Chauncy  Langdon,  Esq.77  One  of  these  was  the 
"  republican."  and  the  other  the  "federal,77  lawyer  of 
the  place.  So  much  business  from  the  lawyer  of  the 
party  opposed  to  Mr.  M.  corroborates  the  statement  we 
have  heard  as  having  been  made  by  that  official,  that 
"Mr.  Miller  was  the  only  honest  democrat  he  knew!77 
Indeed,  in  the  various  civil  offices  he  was  called  to  fill  — 
constable,  sheriff,  and  justice  of  the  peace  — he  appears  to 
have  sustained  an  unimpeachable  character,  and  to  have 
given  the  highest  satisfaction. 

As  an  illustration  of  his  standing  in  the  confidence  of 
the  community,  it  may  be  stated  that,  when  he  was 
called  on  to  furnish  bondsmen  for  his  fidelity  in  the  office 

*  The  time  in  the  year  is  doubtless  indicated  by  the  capitals  "  M.  T.," 
signifying  the  March  term  of  the  Court. 


FAIR    WORLDLY    PROSPECTS.  23 

of  sheriff,  responsible  persons  voluntarily  offered  their 
names,  so  that  several  times  the  amount  required  was 
at  his  command.  He  had  good  reason  to  expect  promo- 
tion to  the  office  of  high  sheriff,  if  he  would  restrain  his 
military  ardor,  and  decline  entering  the  army. 

In  the  case  of  most  men  of  the  world,  with  the  ave- 
nues to  honor,  wealth,  and  domestic  happiness  wide 
open  before  them,  it  is  not  often  that  a  public  station  so 
commanding  would  be  voluntarily  left  for  the  hardships, 
privations  and  dangers,  of  the  camp.  What  strong  im- 
pulses could  have  turned  him  off  in  that  direction? 
Already  the  business  of  his  office  had  placed  him  in 
easy  circumstances.  Such  was  the  amount  of  his  business 
that  he  kept  two  horses,  one  of  which  he  drove,  while  the 
other  was  kept  up  to  rest,  week  by  week,  alternately.  He 
enjoyed  the  respect  and  unbounded  confidence  of  the 
public ;  and  he  only  needed  to  make  himself  still  as 
worthy  of  public  favor  as  he  had  been  hitherto,  and  then, 
with  life  and  health,  all  that  this  world  could  afford  was 
within  his  reach.  His  preference  for  the  army,  so  far 
as  we  know,  sprang  from  these  two  motives :  First,  he 
desired  to  participate  in  the  glory  which  rested  on  the 
memory  of  those  he  held  the  most  dear,  in  the  history  of 
his  country  and  of  his  family.  Second,  he  hoped  to 
enjoy  a  more  inviting  exhibition  of  human  nature  in  the 
scenes  of  military  life  than  experience  or  books  had 
afforded  in  civil  life.  His  desire  for  something  noble  in 
character  was  greater  than  that  for  wealth  or  unsubstan- 
tial fame.  He  was  satisfied  with  the  trial  of  what  was 
around  him,  and  wished  to  try  a  new  field.  This  is 
stated  by  himself  in  his  published  memoir:  —  uIn  the 
mean  time,  I  continued  my  studies,  storing  my  mind 
with  historical  knowledge.  The  more  I  read,  the  more 
dreadfully  corrupt  did  the  character  of  man  appear.  I 
could  discern  no  bright  spot  in  the  history  of  the  past. 
Those  conquerors  of  the  world,  and  heroes  of  history, 
were  apparently  but  demons  in  human  form.  All  the 
sorrow,  suffering,  and  misery  in  the  world,  seemed  to  be 
increased  in  proportion  to  the  power  they  obtained  over 
their  fellows.  I  began  to  feel  very  distrustful  of  all  men. 
In  this  state  of  mind,  I  entered  the  service  of  my  coun- 
try. I  fondly  cherished  the  idea,  that  I  should  find  one 
3* 


24  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    MILLER . 

bright  spot  at  least  in  the  human  character,  as  a  star  of 
hope:  a  love  of  country  —  Patriotism. "  His  military 
life  must  be  given  at  length,  in  another  place. 

Happy,  indeed,  should  we  consider  ourselves,  if  there 
were  no  drawback  to  this  apparent  prosperity  to  be  noted. 
Rarely  is  it  the  case  that  the  honor  of  God  and  the  honor 
of  man  are  coincident.  If  Mr.  Miller  was  not  puffed  up 
by  the  latter,  he  had  lost  much  of  his  regard  for  the 
former.  In  his  worldly  advancement,  there  was  a  seri- 
ous and  dangerous  departure  from  the  Christian  senti- 
ments which  were  instilled  into  his  mind  during  his 
early  life.  Still  there  was  no  defect  in  his  character 
which  the  most  rigid  worldly  standard  of  external  mor- 
ality could  detect.  He  was  perfectly  upright  and  hon- 
orable in  all  his  dealings.  He  was  generous,  almost  to  a 
fault,  with  his  friends  ;  compassionate  and  liberal  to  the 
poor,  and  he  held  in  the  highest  contempt  every  act  that 
could  tarnish  a  man's  personal  and  private  honor.  He 
was  not  profane,  even  to  the  extent  that  too  many  are 
who  pass  for  gentlemen.  He  was  not  intemperate, 
although  he  was  very  much  exposed  to  this  ruinous 
habit,  from  the  example  of  those  into  whose  company 
his  business  called  him — a  habit  which  had  broken  down 
some  of  his  predecessors  in  office,  by  rendering  them 
incapable  of  attending  to  their  business.  He  escaped 
from  it  without  the  least  stain. 

It  could  be  shown,  from  sentiments  embodied  in  some 
of  his  essays,  in  addresses  delivered  before  societies  ex- 
isting at  the  time,  and  in  his  poetic  effusions,  that  his 
moral  and  religious  views  were  of  a  type  that  would  pass 
with  the  world  as  philosophical,  pure,  and  sublime.  But 
the  men  with  whom  he  associated  from  the  time  of  his 
removal  to  Poultney,  and  to  whom  he  was  considerably 
indebted  for  his  worldly  favors,  were  deeply  affected 
with  sceptical  principles  and  deistical  theories.  They 
were  not  immoral  men  ;  but,  as  a  class,  were  good  cit- 
izens, and  generally  of  serious  deportment,  humane  and 
benevolent.  However,  they  rejected  the  Bible  as  the 
standard  of  religious  truth,  and  endeavored  to  make  its 
rejection  plausible  by  such  aid  as  could  be  obtained  from 
the  writings  of  Voltaire,  Hume,  Yolney,  Paine,  Ethan 
Allen,    and   others.     Mr.   Miller   studied    these    works 


HIS    DEISTICAL    SENTIMENTS.  25 

closely,  and  at  length  avowed  himself  a  deist.  As  he 
has  stated  the  period  of  his  deistical  life  to  have  been 
twelve  years,  that  period  must  have  begun  in  1804  ;  for 
he  embraced  or  returned  to  the  Christian  faith  in  1816. 
It  may  fairly  be  doubted,  however,  notwithstanding  his 
known  thoroughness  and  consistency,  whether  Mr.  Mil- 
ler ever  was  fully  settled  in  that  form  of  deism  which 
reduces  man  to  a  level  with  the  brutes,  as  to  the  sup- 
posed duration  of  their  existence.  And  the  question  is 
worthy  of  a  little  inquiry,  to  what  extent  was  he  a 
deist? 

Robert  Hall,  with  his  usual  comprehensiveness  and 
truth,  has  remarked  that  "  infidelity  is  the  offspring  of 
corrupt  Christianity."  It  is  much  more  successful  in 
the  discovery  of  supposed  arguments  against  the  exist- 
ence of  the  Deity  of  the  Scriptures,  in  the  perversion  of 
that  which  is  divine,  than  in  its  institution  and  appointed 
use.  Voltaire  chose  the  ruins  of  human  nature,  in  their 
most  perverted  and  blighted  condition,  and  Volney  chose 
the  " ruins"  of  human  habitations,  for  the  theatre  on 
which  to  display  their  mighty  but  evil  genius.  And 
they  conjured  forth  the  same  evil  spirit  which  had  insti- 
gated or  caused  the  ruin,  in  each  case,  to  utter  a  false 
testimony,  in  reference  both  to  ruined  man  and  his  ruined 
habitations.  These  men  became  the  oracles  of  that 
falsehood  to  the  world  !  But  it  was  never  the  intention 
of  God,  that  man,  or  the  world  fitted  up  for  his  habita- 
tion, should  be  in  this  ruined  condition  :  it  is  the  work 
of  rebellion  and  sin  !  —  of  sin  against  the  greatest  dis- 
plays of  love  and  goodness  that  were  possible,  and 
against  the  purest  and  most  reasonable  law  that  could 
be  given  ;  of  rebellion  that  was  marked  by  contempt  of 
the  universal  Sovereign,  and  of  authority  enforced  by  the 
lightest  test  of  submission.  And  God  has  spoken  to  us, 
to  inform  us  that  he  has  made  provision  for  the  restora- 
tion of  all  men,  and  that  it  is  his  purpose  to  restore  all 
who  become  interested  in  that  provision,  with  the  world 
now  in  ruins,  to  a  condition  which  no  history  but  the 
Bible  has  made  known. 

Paine  could  rail  and  belie  the  supernaturalism  of  the 
Bible,  like  an  incarnate  demon,  and  then  endorse  all  the 
supernaturalism  of  the  most  stupid  pagan  mythology,  in 


26  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    MILLER. 

his  patriotic  and  poetic  productions,  which  he  published 
to  the  world.  And  that  mind  must  be  strangely  out  of 
balance  naturally,  or  wretchedly  perverted,  which  could 
bow  to  the  authority  of  Volney's  "  spectre,"  or  Paine" s 
paganism,  —  the  pure  creations  of  fiction  and  supersti- 
tion, —  and  then  reject  the  Bible  because  it  demands  faith 
in  that  which  is  not  familiar  to  the  senses. 

It  is  generally  true,  that  those  who  become  decided 
sceptics  take  that  most  hopeless  position,  because  they 
have  become  so  depraved  or  perverted  that  they  feel  the 
want  of  an  infidel  theory  to  afford  them  a  license  and 
quiet,  in  their  chosen  course.  It  was  not  so  with  Mr. 
Miller.  In  the  days  of  his  greatest  devotion  to  deistical 
sentiments,  he  desired  something  better.  He  had  his 
difficulties  with  the  Bible  under  its  current  interpreta- 
tions, and  he  tells  us  what  these  difficulties  were.  But 
a  man  like  him  could  never  be  made  to  believe  it  con- 
sistent or  safe  to  abandon  the  Bible,  unless  something 
more  worthy  of  his  trust  were  first  put  in  its  place. 
And  such  a  condition  must  secure  to  that  matchless 
book  a  certain  and  permanent  supremacy.  This  was 
Mr.  Miller's  safety. 

But  if  the  poison  which  had  infused  its  taint  into  the 
system  did  not  appear  as  a  loathsome  blotch  upon  the 
surface,  its  victim  was  not  only  kept  away  from  the  sole 
remedy,  but  that  remedy  was  treated  by  him  with  an 
afflicting  and  dangerous  levity.  This  was  now  the  pain- 
ful feature  of  his  case.  Once  it  was  not  so.  When  he 
was  a  mere  boy — "between  the  years  of  seven  and 
ten"  —  as  he  tells  us,  a  sense  of  the  plague  of  his  heart 
and  of  his  lost  condition  caused  the  deepest  concern  in 
reference  to  his  future  prospects.  He  spent  much  time 
in  trying  to  invent  some  plan  whereby  he  might  find 
acceptance  with  God.  He  tried  the  common  and  most 
natural  course,  in  such  a  state  of  mind,  that  of  being 
"very  good."  "I  will  do  nothing  wrong,  tell  no  lies, 
and  obey  my  parents,"  he  thought.  But  his  mind  was 
still  unsettled  and  unhappy.  Good  works  are  very 
proper,  but  they  can  never  be  accepted  as  the  price  of 
pardon  and  redemption.  He  thought,  too,  as  all  do  in 
the  same  state  of  feeling,  that  something  might  be  effected 
by  sacrifice.     "  I  will  give  up  the  most  cherished  objects  I 


RELIGIOUS    STATE    CONTRASTED.  27 

possess."  But  this  also  failed.  There  is  only  "  one 
offering"  that  can  avail.  In  that,  every  sinner  must 
rest  his  hope  and  plea,  or  remain  without  peace  with 
God.  The  experience  of  Mr.  Miller's  childhood  made 
him  thoughtful  and  serious,  if  it  did  not  result  in  the 
attainment  of  this  inward  sense  of  peace.  Under  his 
inward  conflicts  and  apprehensions  of  worldly  sorrow, 
when  a  young  man,  (in  1803,)  he  poured  out  his  soul 
to  "  religion  ,#  in  this  touching  strain  :  — 

"  Come,  blest  Religion,  with  thy  angel's  face, 
Dispel  this  gloom,  and  brighten  all  the  place  ; 
Drive  this  destructive  passion  from  my  breast ; 
Compose  my  sorrows,  and  restore  my  rest ; 
Show  me  the  path  that  Christian  heroes  trod, 
Wean  me  from  earth,  and  raise  my  soul  to  God  !" 

Two  things,  says  D'Aubigne,  are  essential  to  sound 
Christian  experience.  The  first  is  a  knowledge  of  our 
condition  as  sinners ;  the  second  is  a  knowledge  of  the 
grace  of  God,  in  its  manifestations  to  the  soul.  Mr. 
Miller,  like  most  if  not  all  others,  had  learned  the  first 
in  his  early  life  ;  but  he  had  evidently  not  then  attained 
the  second  of  these  elements  of  a  true  religious  life. 
And,  by  not  attaining  that  important  position  in  the 
process  of  deliverance  from  our  fallen  condition,:4ie  be- 
came wearied  of  a  sense  of  his  need,  if  he  did  not  lose 
it  entirely.  In  the  chosen  employment  of  his  intellect, 
with  a  more  ample  supply  of  books  at  command ;  in  the 
midst  of  an  admiring  and  merry  social  circle ;  in  receiv- 
ing the  honors  of  the  world  from  the  hand  of  his  supe- 
riors, and  in  reaping  an  honorable  portion  of  the  treas- 
ures of  the  world,  why  should  he  desire  any  other  source 
of  enjoyment — and  one  altogether  unknown,  unappreci- 
ated and  unpopular,  in  the  circle  where  he  moved? 
What  use  had  he  for  that  religion  he  had  seen  verified, 
and  felt  the  need  of,  in  the  less  cultivated  family  circle 
at  Low  Hampton  ? 

If  those  who  never  become  acquainted  with  the  les- 
sons of  truth  may  be  satisfied  without  the  consolation  of 
which  its  lessons  speak,  with  those  who  are  made  famil- 
iar with  these  lessons,  it  is  generally  very  different. 
They  can  seldom  feel  satisfied  with  themselves  without 
making  a  hearty  surrender  of  life,  and  all  God  has  given 


28  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

them,  to  his  service.  As  they  know  this  is  their  reason- 
able service,  anything  short  of  this,  they  know,  must  be 
unreasonable.  But  how  few  take  this  narrow  path! 
How  many  turn  away  to  join  the  multitude  !  The  tal- 
ent, however,  is  in  their  hands.  They  must  dispose  of 
that,  if  they  will  not  submit  themselves  to  the  disposal 
of  its  Giver.  Some  make  it  the  reason  for  entertaining 
and  venting  a  more  malignant  and  blasphemous  form  of 
hatred  against  everything  which  bears  the  name  of  God. 
This  quiets  all  fear  of  being  reproached  as  religious,  and 
it  is  the  awful  snare  into  which  many  are  led  by  the  fear 
of  man.  Another  class  of  these  unfaithful  recipients  of 
the  talent  of  truth  try  to  get  along  with  a  popular  ex- 
ternal expression  of  respect  for  its  claims ;  and  thus  they 
escape  the  dreaded  reproach. 

A  third  class,  naturally  too  frank  even  to  appear  to 
venerate  what  they  do  not  heartily  respect,  and  too 
deeply  impressed  with  the  goodness  of  the  Deity  to  be- 
come blasphemers,  but  still  too  fearful  of  man  to  encoun- 
ter his  frown,  seek  to  save  themselves  from  k  by 
making  the  defects  of  the  humble  but  unpopular  represen- 
tatives of  truth  a  subject  of  merriment.  This  course  was 
taken  by  Mr.  Miller.  This  is  the  class  to  which  he 
then  b^onged.  He  banished  from  his  memory  the  im- 
pressions of  his  early  life,  and  must  silence  all  fear  of 
reproach  on  account  of  them  ;  so  he  gave  to  his  sceptical 
associates  an  assurance  that  he  had  mastered  his  super- 
stition, as  they  deemed  it,  by  performing,  for  their  sport, 
the  devotions  of  the  worship  to  which  he  had  been  accus- 
tomed, and  especially  by  mimicking  the  devotional  pecu- 
liarities of  some  of  his  own  family  relatives. 

Among  these  pious  relatives  there  were  two,  in  partic- 
ular, whose  presence  or  name  was  calculated  to  remind 
him  of  his  repudiated  obligations,  and  whose  infliience 
over  him  he  labored  to  repel,  by  making  them  the  theme 
of  his  mirth.  One  of  these  was  his  grandfather  Phelps, 
pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  at  Orwell ;  the  other  was 
his  uncle,  Elihu  Miller,  who  was  settled  as  pastor  of  the 
Baptist  church  at  Low  Hampton,  in  1812.  These  were 
men  of  unpolished  exterior,  but  of  decided  character, 
strong  voice,  and  ardent  devotion.  Men  whose  feat- 
ures were  so  strongly  marked  would  make  fine  subjects 


HIS  DEISTICAL  POSITION.  29 

for  striking  portraits;  and  if  all  their  traits  could  be 
brought  out,  there  would  be  found  a  large  bestowment 
of  the  treasure  of  heavenly  wisdom  and  virtue  in  the 
earthen  vessels.  It  was  the  excellence  of  the  heavenly 
traits,  and  the  roughness  of  the  earthly,  which  made 
them  so  desirable  and  so  ready  subjects  of  caricature. 

These  humble  ambassadors  of  Christ,  and  other  pious 
relatives,  often  visited  Mr.  Miller's  house  at  Poultney ; 
and,  although  he  received  them  with  affection  and  re- 
spect, and  entertained  them  in  the  most  generous  man- 
ner, he  was  in  the  habit  of  imitating,  with  the  most 
ludicrous  gravity,  their  words,  tones  of  voice,  gestures, 
fervency,  and  even  the  grief  they  might  manifest  for 
such  as  himself,  to  afford  a  kind  of  entertainment  for  his 
sceptical  associates,  which  they  seemed  to  enjoy  with  a 
particular  relish. 

Little  did  he  then  think,  that  he  was  measuring  to 
these  faithful  men  what  was  to  be  measured  to  him 
again,  pressed  down,  shaken  together,  and  running  over. 
And  probably  it  was  not  known  to  him,  that  these  pray- 
ing men  had  already  expressed  the  hope  —  almost  a 
prophecy  —  that  their  prayers  would  be  answered,  and 
that  he  would  some  day  be  engaged  in  perpetuating  the 
work  they  were  endeavoring  to  advance. 

There  was  more  than  one  heart  that  was  almost 
inconsolably  afflicted  by  this  conduct  of  Mr.  Miller.  His 
mother  knew  of  it,  and  it  was  as  the  bitterness  of  death 
to  her.  Some  of  his  pious  sisters  witnessed,  with  tears, 
his  improprieties.  And  when  his  mother  spoke  of  the 
affliction  to  her  father  Phelps,  he  would  console  her  by 
saying,  "  Don't  afflict  yourself  too  deeply  about  William. 
There  is  something  for  him  to  do  yet,  in  the  cause  of 
God!;j 

Although  Mr.  Miller  avowed  himself  a  deist,  and  was 
recognized  as  such  by  deists,  this  offence  against  all  pro- 
priety, in  trifling  with  what  his  dearest  relatives  regarded 
as  most  sacred,  this  thoughtless  trifling  with  the  humble 
messengers  of  the  Gospel,  was  the  darkest  feature  in  his 
character.  To  him  it  was  the  most  natural  course  which 
the  circumstances  of  his  position  could  suggest,  and, 
undoubtedly,  appeared  to  be  the  least  violation  of  former 
convictions   and   educational   proprieties  which  would 


30  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    MILLER. 

allow  him  to  stand  as  he  did,  in  the  favor  and  confidence 
of  his  unbelieving  associates.  He  had  not  then  become 
acquainted  with  the  source  of  strength,  by  which  he 
might  have  been  sustained  before  the  enemies  of  the 
Christian  faith  ;  he  was  unprepared  to  take  the  Christian 
position,  and  he  became  what  the  influences  around  him 
naturally  determined.  To  give  the  true  state  of  the 
case,  the  darker  shades  must  appear  with  the  lighter. 
He  took  the  position  of  an  unbeliever.  But  that  he  was 
not  a  deist  of  the  rank  type,  will  appear  more  fully  from 
his  own  statements,  especially  in  his  letters  while  in  the 
army,  which  will  be  presented  in  the  next  chapter. 

We  have  thus  stated  Mr.  Miller's  social  and  public 
position :  his  worldly  prospects,  and  his  religious  state. 
The  long-suffering  of  God  was  still  to  be  exercised 
towards  him.  He  was  to  become  satisfied  with  the 
insufficiency  of  the  world.  Then  the  light  which  had 
become  darkness  was  to  be  revived  within  him;  the 
breath  of  life  from  God  would  disclose  the  all-sufficient 
portion,  and  he  would  go  forth  to  build  again  the  faith 
he  had  destroyed. 

Many  were  the  prayers  that  ascended  in  his  behalf; 
and  some  of  those  who  were  the  most  deeply  interested 
for  him  would  pass  away  before  their  prayers  would  be 
answered.  But  the  great  lessons  of  long-suffering,  of 
faithfulness,  and  of  power  to  deliver  out  of  the  most 
artful  snare  of  the  adversary,  would  be  the  more  mag- 
nified, on  the  part  of  God ;  the  praying,  who  were  yet 
alive,  would  hail  the  answer  with  greater  joy.  and  the 
delivered  one  would  be  the  better  prepared  to  take  others, 
in  the  same  fearful  condition,  by  the  hand,  and  lead 
them  to  Him  who  came  to  seek  and  save  the  lost ! 


CHAPTER    III. 

HIS    MILITARY   LIFE. 

The  motives  which  led  Mr.  Miller  to  resign  his  public 
position  as  a  civil  officer,  and  enter  upon  the  arduous 
and  perilous  theatre  of  military  life,  have  been  stated  in 
the  preceding  chapter.  Among  the  honors  conferred  on 
him  in  the  military  department,  at  the  time  of  his 
advancement  in  the  civil,  was  his  election  to  the  office 
of  lieutenant,  by  superseding  a  commissioned  officer, 
who  expected  it  by  promotion.  His  lieutenant's  com- 
mission is  dated  July  21st,  1810.  It  is  signed,  "  Jonas 
Galusha,  Governor  of  Vermont." 

To  some  of  the  readers  of  this  work,  the  form  of  the 
oath  taken  on  entering  upon  the  duties  of  such  an  office 
may  be  of  interest.  A  copy  of  that  oath,  found  on  the 
back  of  Mr.  Miller's  commission,  is  as  follows : 

"I3  William  Miller,  solemnly  swear,  that  I  will  be 
true  and  faithful  to  the  State  of  Vermont ;  that  I  will  not, 
directly  nor  indirectly,  do  any  act  or  thing  injurious  to 
the  Constitution  or  Government  thereof,  as  established  by 
Convention.     So  help  me  God. 

"I  also  swear,  that  I  will  support  the  Constitution  of 
the  United  States.  WM.  MILLER. 

"  August  13th,  1810.  The  foregoing  oaths  were  taken 
and  subscribed  to  before  me. 

"  CALEB  HENDY,  Jr.,  Brig.  Gen:' 

The  reader  will  see  that  this  commission  is  dated 
about  two  years  prior  to  the  declaration  of  war  with 
England  by  the  United  States.  The  premonitions  of  that 
war,  however,  were  already  seen.  On  the  18th  of  June, 
1812,  the  declaration  was  made  in  due  form;  and  the 
first  note  of  preparation  found  Mr.  Miller,  with  hundreds 
of  his  hardy  and  patriotic  Green  Mountain  neighbors, 
ready  to  take  the  field.  A  very  short  time  after  it  was 
4 


32  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    MILLER. 

announced  that  he  would  take  his  place  at  the  head  of 
a  company  of  state  volunteers,  the  ranks  were  filled. 
And  on  the  day  after  the  date  of  the  act  of  the  state 
government  of  Vermont  which  authorized  the  raising 
of  such  a  body,  his  captain's  commission  is  dated. 

It  is  presumed  that  very  few  of  Mr.  Miller's  particular 
friends  will  feel  any  special  interest  in  these  details  of 
warlike  affairs.  He  is  nothing  more  nor  less  to  them,  on 
account  of  his  connection  with  these  matters.  But  it  is 
not  so  with  all  who  may  read  this  work.  The  fact  that 
he  honored  these  public  and  responsible  offices,  which 
men  are  accustomed  to  regard  with  so  much  respect. 
would  weigh  more,  on  the  question  of  competency,  in  the 
estimation  of  many  very  worthy  people,  than  the  purest 
Christian  deportment  in  ordinary  life.  His  true  military 
station  has  also  been  misstated :  and  it  is  the  work  oi 
the  biographer  and  historian  to  give  facts  as  they  are. 
The  question  of  Mr.  Miller's  rank  and  soldierly  character 
can  be  presented  in  its  true  light,  by  the  use  of  authentic 
documents,  in  fewer  words  than  can  do  the  question 
justice  in  any  other  form.  And  these  documents  must 
be  decisive.  No  other  reasons  need  to  be  stated  for 
employing  them.  His  captain's  commission,  in  the  Ver- 
mont  volunteers,  is  in  these  words : 

(,'L.  S.  By  His  Excellency,  Jonas  Gaixsha,  Esquire. 
Captain-General,  Governor,  and  Commander  in  Chief 
in  and  over  the  State  of  Vermont : 

"  To  William  Miller.  Esq..  greeting  : 

"  You  being  elected  a  Captain  of  a  Company  of  Infantry 
hi  the  first  Brigade  of  Volunteers  of  this  State  :  and  repos- 
ing special  trust  and  confidence  in  your  Patriotism.  Valor. 
and  good  Conduct,  I  do.  by  virtue  of  these  Presents,  in 
the  name  and  by  the  authority  of  the  Freemen  of  the 
State  of  Vermont,  fully  authorize  and  empower  you.  the 
said  William  Miller,  to  take  charge  of  the  said  Company 
as  their  Captain,  pursuant  to  an  act  for  raising  a  Corps 
of  Volunteers,  passed  November  6th.  1812. 

"  You  will,  therefore,  carefully  and  diligently  discharge 
the  said  duty,  by  doing  and  performing  every  matter  and 
thing  thereunto  relating.  You  will  observe  and  follow 
such  orders  and  directions  as  you  shall,  from  time  to 


MARCH     TO     BURLINGTON.  33 

time,  receive  from  the  Governor  of  the  State  for  the  time 
being,  or  any  other  your  superior  officers,  according  to 
military  discipline  and  the  laws  of  this  State  :  and  all 
officers  and  soldiers  under  your  command  are  to  take 
notice  hereof,  and  yield  due  obedience  to  your  orders,  as 
their  Captain,  in  pursuance  of  the  trust  in  you  reposed. 
"  In  testimony  whereof,  I  have  caused  the  Seal  of  this 
State  to  be  hereunto  affixed. 

"  Given  under  my  hand,  in  Council  Chamber,  at  Montpe- 
lier,  this  seventh  day  of  November,  in  the  year  of  our 
Lord  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  twelve,  and  of 
the  Independence  of  the  United  States  the  thirty- 
seventh.  JONAS  GALUSHA. 
"By  his  Excellency's  command. 

"  R.  C.  Mallary,  Secretary  P 

This  company  being  filled  up,  organized,  and  author- 
ized to  take  the  field,  pursuant  to  orders,  next  came  the 
scene  of  trial  to  a  soldier  —  only  inferior  to  the  hour  of 
battle  —  that  of  bidding  adieu  to  home,  and  all  that  is 
dear  to  the  heart  of  mar^  associated  with  home.  This 
was  an  exciting  and  deeply  affecting  scene.  Scepticism 
was  silenced  before  the  -working  of  nature,  of  reason, 
and  the  proprieties  of  such  a  moment,  as  decided  by  all 
nations,  Pagan,  Jewish,  and  Christian.  How  could 
these  noble-hearted  men  —  husbands,  sons,  brothers  — 
part  with  those  who  were  dearer  to  them  than  life  itself, 
under  circumstances  they  might  properly  regard  as  not 
very  unlike  to  those  of  a  dying  hour,  without  asking  the 
benediction  of  the  Almighty  1  It  was  impossible.  But 
it  was  not  generally  expected,  by  those  who  knew  Cap- 
tain Miller  as  a  deist  and  a  railer  at  the  devout,  that  the 
devotions  of  this  solemn  leave-taking  would  be  anything 
more  than  a  ceremony,  in  which  he  would  act  the  part 
of  a  constrained  or  indifferent  spectator.  Judge,  then,  of 
the  effect,  when  he  was  seen  to  take  his  former  friend, 
who  was  present  with  the  multitude,  by  the  hand ;  and, 
with  a  grace  and  tenderness  which  all  felt  to  be  in  full 
tone  with  the  occasion,  and  under  deep  emotion,  present 
him  to  the  company  as  the  man  of  God,  with  whom  they 
would  join  in  prayer.  The  chaplain,  on  this  occasion, 
was  Elder  Kendrick,  who  had  felt  and  maintained  a 


34  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    MILLER. 

special  interest  in  Mr.  Miller,  in  spite  of  his  deism,  from 
the  first  of  his  acquaintance  with  him.  In  his  prayer,  all 
the  interest  he  felt  in  the  members  of  the  company,  many 
of  whom  were  his  neighbors ;  in  Captain  Miller,  as  a 
promising  family  relative  of  his  most  intimate  Christian 
friends ;  and  in  the  great  public  occasion,  as  a  patriot, 
was  poured  out  with  the  most  becoming  solemnity,  affec- 
tion, and  fervency.  The  effect  was  almost  overpowering. 
It  is  fresh  in  the  memory  of  those  present,  to  this  day. 

Captain  Miller's  company,  with  the  great  body  of 
volunteers  raised  in  that  region,  was  ordered  to  Burling- 
ton, which  was  expected  to  be  the  theatre  of  war  for 
that  campaign.  The  fatigue  of  the  march,  and  an 
accident  which  proved  almost  fatal  to  Mr.  Miller,  are 
described  in  the  following  letter  to  his  wife. 

"  Camp  at  Burlington,  June  13th,  1813. 

"Dear  Lucy  :  — I  am  now  at  this  place,  after  a  fatiguing 
march.  My  feet  are  worn  all  out,  and  my  body  is  very 
sore.  On  our  march  from  Bennington  to  this  place,  I 
met  with  an  accident,  which  almost  deprived  me  of  life. 
The  last  day  of  our  march,  my  feet  and  ankles  being 
very  lame,  I  hired  a  passage  in  a  wagon,  with  four  or 
five  of  my  brother  officers.  Capt.  Clark  and  myself  got 
into  the  hind  part  of  the  wagon,  and,  while  fixing  the 
seat,  the  horses  started,  and  threw  me  out.  I  fell  on  the 
back  part  of  my  head,  and  they  have  since  informed  me 
that  I  lay  as  if  dead  for  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes.  They 
put  me  into  the  wagon,  and  carried  me  five  or  six  miles, 
before  I  came  to  my  senses.  My  head  is  still  very  sore. 
Ensign  Dake  was  in  the  wagon,  and  paid  the  strictest 
attention  to  me. 

"  I  have  not  much  news  of  consequence  to  write.  We 
expected  the  British  in  at  Burlington  every  hour.  There 
were  about  a  thousand  men  came  in  yesterday  and  to- 
day from  Bennington  and  Windsor,  and  we  are  ready  to 
meet  them  with  any  force  they  can  bring  against  us.  I 
have  nothing  more  to  write,  but  to  subscribe  myself  your 
ever-loving  husband,  Wm.  Miller.73 

On  his  arrival  at  Burlington,  Mr.  Miller  was  trans- 
ferred from  the  volunteers  of  the  State  of  Vermont  to 


THE   RECRUITING   SERVICE.  35 

the  regular  army  of  the  United  States.  He  first  took 
the  rank  of  lieutenant,  and  was  immediately  ordered 
back  to  Rutland  County,  to  attend  to  the  recruiting  ser- 
vice, as  the  following  "  General  Order"  will  show. 

"Encampment,  Burlington,  June  13th,  1813. 
"Sir j  —  You  are  hereby  commanded  to  repair  to  the 
County  of  Rutland,  and  there  attend  to  the  recruiting 
service  for  the  30th  Regt.  Infantry  in  U.  S.  Army.  You 
will  govern  yourself  by  the  laws  of  the  United  States, 
and  return  to  this  post  when  commanded. 

"MASON   ORMSBIE,  Maj.  Infry. 
"  To  Lieut.  W.  Miller,  U.  S.  Army." 

Such  a  transfer  is  considered  honorable  in  the  military 
sense;  and  the  change  of  service,  which  allowed  Mr. 
Miller  to  enjoy  the  comforts  of  home  and  the  attention 
of  friends,  while  suffering  from  his  late  accident,  must 
have  been  very  acceptable.  But  there  were  reasons  for 
the  arrangement  which  bear  most  favorably  on  his 
reputation.  The  army  was  in  great  want  of  men  who 
could  be  relied  upon,  under  the  dangers  which  threat- 
ened from  the  enemy  in  the  direction  of  Canada ;  and 
there  were  few  men  who  could  accomplish  so  much,  in 
bringing  them  into  the  service,  as  Mr.  Miller.  He  was 
very  generally  known,  and  highly  respected,  in  the 
region  assigned  him;  he  was  warmly  devoted  to  the 
service,  so  that  his  example  had  a  powerful  effect ;  and 
the  returns,  which  official  documents  fully  exhibit, 
demonstrate  the  wisdom  of  directing  his  efficiency  to 
this  department  of  the  service. 

He  was  employed  in  raising  recruits  till  1814;  but 
this  period  of  comparative  repose  was  of  short  duration. 
He  was  thus  remanded  to  head-quarters  : 

"  Cantonment,  Burlington,  July  7th,  1813. 
"Lieut.  W.  Miller,  at  Poultney. — You  are  hereby 
commanded  to  join  your  regt.  at  Burlington  immediately, 
and  report  yourself  to  the  commanding  officer. 

"  ELI  AS  F  ASSET,  Col.  30th  Inf'ry." 


Soon  after  his  return  to  Burlington,  in  July  of  1813, 
Mr.  Miller  was  called  to  suffer  another  of  the  dangers 

4* 


36  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    MILLER. 

of  army  life,  which,  on  many  accounts,  is  quite  as  serious 
as  those  of  the  battle-field.  The  army  fever,  which 
broke  out  among  the  troops  at  Burlington,  has  already 
been  referred  to.  So  alarming  were  its  ravages,  that  the 
great  body  of  the  army,  quartered  in  or  near  the  town, 
was  removed  several  miles  into  the  more  elevated 
country,  east  of  the  lake.  A  change  from  the  humid 
atmosphere  and  bad  water  of  one  locality,  which  aggra- 
vated, if  they  did  not  cause  the  distemper,  to  the 
salubrious  air  and  pure  water  of  the  other  locality, 
could  not  fail  of  producing  a  happy  effect.  But  those 
who  were  too  feeble  to  be  removed,  and  those  who  could 
obtain  suitable  accommodations  in  the  town,  remained. 
Mr.  Miller  was  among  these. 

One  of  the  very  common,  most  lamentable  and  morti- 
fying evils  of  war,  is  the  absolute  dependence  of  the 
poor  soldier  on  those  whose  avarice  or  profligacy  rob 
him  of  all  the  comforts,  and  often  of  the  necessaries. 
which  his  country  may  provide  for  him.  The  medical 
department  of  the  army  too  often  furnishes  this  form 
of  the  horrors  of  war.  When  a  mere  reckless  pretender 
to  the  title  of  his  profession,  who  has  become  disquali- 
fied for  any  station  in  civil  society,  obtains  a  place 
in  this  department,  the  life  of  a  soldier  is  thought  as 
little  of  as  the  life  of  a  dog.  It  would  be  far  more 
desirable  to  face  the  camion  of  the  enemy,  than  to  fall 
into  such  hands.  How  many  of  the  brave  soldiers  at 
Burlington,  who  found  so  undesirable  an  end,  were 
indebted  to  official  aid  for  that  result,  is  unknown. 
Happy  were  those  who  could  provide  for  themselves. 
Mr.  Miller  was  thus  favored.  His  fever  bore  a  greater 
resemblance  to  the  common  bilious  fever  than  to  the 
prevailing  epidemic.  But  the  same  potations,  dealt 
out  so  profanely  by  the  bloated  official  to  the  dying 
around  him,  were  prescribed  for  the  young  officer  from 
Poultney.  He  knew  the  danger,  and"  sternly  refused  to 
take  the  stuff.  He  immediately  put  himself  under  the 
care  of  one  of  the  resident  physicians  of  the  village, 
Dr.  Littlefield,  whose  name  is  still  remembered  in  the 
family  of  Mr.  Miller  with  sentiments  of  affectionate 
gratitude. 

At  the  time  now  referred   to,  Burlington  appeared 


MRS.    CUSHMAN?S    HOSPITALITY.  37 

much  more  like  a  camp  than  like  a  place  devoted  to  the 
peaceful  pursuits  of  commerce  and  learning.  As  it  was 
the  most  important  United  States  settlement  on  the 
shores  of  Lake  Champlain,  it  was  generally  expected 
that  the  English  forces  would  be  concentrated  here,  for 
its  conquest  or  destruction.  The  regular  routine  of  col- 
lege exercises  was  suspended,  and  the  halls  of  learning 
were  appropriated  to  the  sick  and  dying  officers  of  the 
army.  To  enjoy  such  accommodations  was  esteemed  a 
great  favor.  But  these  rooms  were  so  much  crowded, 
and  such  was  the  want  of  proper  aid,  that  the  air 
within  every  part  of  the  building,  occupied  was  like 
a  pestilential  solvent  for  everything  that  passed  into  it. 
In  one  of  these  rooms,  Mr.  Miller  was  confined  for 
several  days  after  he  was  taken  sick.  As  soon,  however, 
as  the  tidings  of  his  sickness  reached  Poultney,  his  wife 
resolved  to  place  herself  at  his  bed-side  with  as  little 
delay  as  possible.  An  anxious  and  hurried  ride,  in  an 
open  wagon,  brought  her  to  witness  such  a  scene  of 
suffering  and  death  as  she  had  not  before  known.  She 
found  her  husband  quite  as  comfortable  as  she  expected ; 
but  on  entering  his  apartment,  she  saw  that  the  prospect 
of  help  for  him,  and  of  escape  for  herself,  was  about 
equally  dark.  But  what  could  she  do  ?  He  could  not 
be  taken  home :  she  was  among  strangers,  and  all  that 
the  generosity  of  the  inhabitants  could  furnish,  which 
was  nobly  brought  forward,  was  needed  to  meet  the 
common  demand.  Most  providential ly,  there  was 
another  of  her  own  sex  on  the  premises,  who.  although 
she  had  devoted  her  ample  stock  of  bedding,  and  other 
conveniences  for  the  sick  room,  to  the  common  benefit 
of  those  who  occupied  the  college,  could  still  sympathize 
with  a  wife  and  mother  in  such  affliction,  and  cheerfully 
make  the  sacrifice  that  was  needed  to  meet  the  case. 
This  noble-hearted  woman  was  Mrs.  Cushman,  whose 
husband  had  change  of  the  college  boarding-house.  She 
invited  Mrs.  Miller  into  her  spacious  and  airy  parlor; 
she  brought  forward  her  unsoiled  bed-linen,  and  other 
things  on  which  the  comfort  of  the  sick  so  much 
depends,  and  generously  devoted  them,  the  parlor,  and 
its  ample  appendages,  to  the  use  of  her  afflicted  visitor. 
But  little  time  was  needed  to  put  all  in  order  for  the 


38  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    MILLER. 

removal  of  the  patient  to  this  most  inviting  apartment. 
All  the  circumstances  of  the  change  combined  to  make 
its  effects  the  most  desirable.  The  fear  of  burdening 
Mrs.  Cushman  -was  the  greatest  difficulty  in  the  way  of 
feeling  themselves  at  home.  In  the  comparative  quiet 
of  this  apartment,  with  the  skilful  attention  of  Dr. 
Littlefield.  and  the  constant  attention  of  his  wife.  Mr. 
Miller  exhibited  the  most  gratifying  indications  of 
recovery.  But  as  hope  became  strong  in  reference  to 
him.  there  were  reasons  for  alarm  about  Mrs.  Miller. 

The  fatigue  of  the  journey  to  Burlington,  the  anxiety 
she  felt  for  her  husband,  the  constant  care  and  labor 
required  to  make  him  comfortable,  had  prostrated  her  so 
far.  that  she  became  peculiarly  exposed  to  the  infection  of 
the  pestilence.  She  was  permitted  only  to  rejoice  in  her 
husband's  improvement  before  the  usual  premonitions 
of  the  dreaded  malady  appeared  in  her  own  system.  As 
it  was  no  longer  indispensable  that  she  should  continue  at 
Burlington,  she  resolved  to  fly  from  the  infected  region, 
and  run  the  risk  of  a  failure  in  reaching  home.  Although 
her  husband  was  afflicted  by  the  thought  of  her  leaving 
him.  he  was  much  more  afflicted  by  the  fear  that  she 
might  be  prostrated,  and  fall  into  unkind  hands,  on  the 
journey ;  or  even  become  helpless  on  the  highway,  and 
die.  as  his  grandfather  Phelps  had.  by  the  same  disease, 
only  a  few  months  before.  However,  she  ordered  the 
lad  who  accompanied  her  to  get  the  carriage  ready,  and 
bidding  Mr.  Miller  farewell,  she  took  the  road  towards 
Poultney.  which  leads  through  the  hilly  country  above 
the  almost  level  slope  which  borders  the  lake :  and  after 
a  moderate  ride  of  two  days,  she  arrived  home,  in  much 
better  health  than  when  she  left  Burlington.  Although 
the  sun  was  very  hot  —  for  this  was  in  August  —  the 
pure,  invigorating  air  of  the  mountains  had  restored  the 
tone  of  her  naturally  vigorous  constitution,  and  the 
alarming  symptoms  disappeared  without  medical  aid. 
Mr.  Miller  was  immediately  informed  of  the  beneficial 
effects  of  her  journey,  which  had  as  good  an  effect  on 
him  as  the  best  medicine  could  have;  and  his  health 
soon  became  so  much  improved,  that  he  could  resume 
the  post  of  duty. 

As  the  enemy  did  not  make  their  appearance  in  the 


EFFECTS    OF   FEVER.  39 

vicinity  of  Burlington,  or  on  the  east  of  Lake  Cham- 
plain,  arrangements  were  made  to  locate  the  American 
troops  on  the  west  side  of  the  lake,  and  to  advance  into 
Canada.  Plattsburgh  became  the  head-quarters  of  one 
division  of  the  troops ;  Burlington  continued  the  head- 
quarters for  another.  In  the  autumn  of  1813,  Mr.  Mil- 
ler had  so  far  recovered  as  to  cross  over  the  lake ;  but 
the  effects  of  his  fever  appeared  in  the  form  of  a  bad 
sore  on  his  left  arm.  This  became  so  painful,  and  was 
so  much  of  an  annoyance,  that  a  surgical  operation  was 
advised,  which  was  to  remove  the  affected  parts  of  the 
flesh,  so  as  to  cleanse  the  bone  by  scraping  it.  If  this  was 
not  done,  possibly  amputation  would  be  necessary.  He 
was  somewhat  displeased  by  the  rudeness  of  the  thought- 
less medical  students,  or  surgeon's  mates,  who  too  often 
seem  to  think  that  a  disabled  soldier  is  good  for  nothing  but 
to  cut  up  for  experiments.  And,  as  they  handled  the  dis- 
eased limb  one  day  somewhat  roughly,  and  spoke  very 
lightly  of  its  amputation,  as  a  matter  of  course,  he  re- 
minded them  that  his  sword  arm.  was  still  sound ;  and, 
putting  his  hand  on  the  hilt  of  his  sword,  then  before 
him,  gave  them  to  understand  that,  whatever  might  be 
advised  in  the  case,  he  should  not  submit  to  any  unnec- 
essary pain  for  their  amusement.  They  understood 
him,  and  it  ended  their  rudeness. 

This  danger,  however,  was  shortly  over,  and  he  was 
able  to  join  his  regiment  in  actual  service,  while  they 
were  out  in  search  of  the  enemy  on  the  Canadian  fron- 
tier. The  particulars  of  this  expedition  are  given  in  a 
letter  to  his  wife,  dated 

"  Chatuagay  Four  Corners,  Oct.  31,  1813. 
"  Lucy:  —  I  once  more  have  the  pleasure  of  writing  to 
you,  and  am  very  sorry  that  I  cannot  tell  you  of  hair- 
breadth escapes  and  dismal  sights,  hideous  yells  and 
war-whoops ;  but  so  it  is.  I  have  seen  nothing  like  an 
enemy,  although  I  have  been  into  Canada.  I  started 
from  this  place  last  Thursday,  to  join  my  regiment ;  but, 
meeting  some  officers,  we  were  ordered  to  return  to  this 
place.  The  army  is  expected  here  in  a  few  hours.  They 
stayed  only  three  or  four  miles  back;  they  have  had  a 
number  of  skirmishes  with  Indians,  and,  last  Tuesday  3 


40  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

they  had  a  general  engagement  with  the  whole  British 
force,  consisting  of  regulars,  militia  and  Indians,  and 
it  is  said,  would  have  taken  the  whole,  was  it  not  for 
the  folly  of  some  of  our  guides,  who  led  that  part  of  our 
army  astray  which  should  have  fallen  on  their  rear: 
and  they  being  thus  led  astray  and  bewildered  in  the 
woods,  the  Indians  fell  upon  them  in  the  night,  and 
made  considerable  havoc  among  them.  Night  before 
last,  they  had  another  encounter  with  our  piquet  guard, 
and  there  were  some  killed  and  wounded  on  both  sides. 
You  will  undoubtedly  hear  many  stories,  but  the  truth 
you  will  hardly  get,  for  there  are  as  many  different  sto- 
ries here  as  there  are  men.  I  expect  we  shall  be  posted 
at  this  place,  that  is,  the  30th  regt. ;  but  wherever  we 
may  be,  you  will  hear  from  me  as  often  as  you  wish  to. 
I  have  not  heard  from  you  since  I  came  from  home.  Do 
write  immediately,  and  direct  your  letter  to  "  Lieut.  Wm. 
Miller,  of  30th  Infantry,  Northern  Armv. 

*"Wm.  Miller. 

"  P.  S.  Nov.  1st.  1813.  I  have  joined  my  regt.,  and 
find  all  our  soldiers  alive  and  well  from  Poultney.  We 
lost  none  from  our  regt. ;  and  only  one  wounded.  It  is 
said  we  lost  30  killed  in  said  battle.  We  some  expect 
an  attack  by  the  Indians  soon.  -vy      ™  „ 

These  "skirmishes"  closed  the  campaign  of  1813  in 
this  quarter;  and,  while  the  great  body  of  the  troops, 
under  General  Macomb,  were  preparing,  at  Burlington 
and  Plattsburgh,  for  more  efficient  operations  the  follow- 
ing year,  Mr.  Miller  was  engaged  in  the  recruiting  ser- 
vice, in  the  vicinity  of  his  residence,  and  through  the 
State  of  Vermont  generally.  He  was  at  home  on  a  fur- 
lough, when  he  received  the  following  orders  from  the 
colonel  of  his  regiment :  — 

"Burlington,  Jan.  10th,  1814. 
"  To  Lieut.  William  Miller. 

"  You  will  immediately  repair  to  Poultney,  and  such 
other  places  as  you  think  proper,  and  there  attend  to  the 
recruiting  service,  agreeable  to  your  last  instructions. 
"  ELIAS  FASSET,  Col  30th  Infy." 


CAMPAIGN    OF    1814.  41 

The  year  1814  was  to  decide  the  contest  between 
Great  Britain  and  the  United  States.  The  former  was 
able  to  bring  her  best  troops  into  the  field,  and  the  latter 
must  put  forth  all  her  resources  to  meet  them.  It  seems 
almost  impossible  that  human  skill  or  strength  could 
have  brought  about  the  result.  There  probably  was  no 
particular  point  of  the  general  scene  of  the  war  where 
the  circumstances  of  the  American  arms  were  of  a  more 
critical  nature  than  at  the  point  where  Mr.  Miller,  with 
his  brave  countrymen,  were  to  stand.  Early  in  the 
year,  and  while  he  was  searching  out  and  sending  into 
the  field  the  recruits  from  the  Green  Mountains,  he  was 
promoted  to  the  office  of  Captain  in  the  regular  army. 
As  this  is  the  point,  in  Mr.  Miller's  history,  which  has 
been  misapprehended  by  some  who  have  referred  to  him 
publicly,  although  the  fact  involved  is,  to  his  friends,  of 
but  little  interest,  the  document  which  makes  all  clear  is 
given : 

11  The  President  of  the  United  States  of  America  to  all 
who  shall  see  these  presents ',  greeting : 

"Know  ye,  That,  reposing  special  trust  and  confidence 
ill  the  patriotism,  valor,  fidelity,  and  abilities,  of  Wil- 
liam Miller.  I  have  nominated,  and  by  and  with  the  ad- 
vice and  consent  of  the  Senate,  do  appoint  him  a  Captain 
in  the  Thirtieth  Regiment  of  Infantry,  in  the  service  of  the 
United  States :  to  rank  as  such  from  the  thirty-first  day 
of  January,  eighteen  hundred  and  fourteen.  He  is, 
therefore,  carefully  and  diligently  to  discharge  the  duty 
of  Captain,  by  doing  and  performing  all  manner  of  things 
thereunto  belonging.  And  I  do  strictly  charge  and 
require  all  officers  and  soldiers  under  his  command  to  be 
obedient  to  his  orders  as  Captain.  And  he  is  to  observe 
and  follow  such  orders  and  directions,  from  time  to  time, 
as  he  shall  receive  from  me,  or  the  future  President  of 
the  United  States  of  America,  or  the  General  or  other 
superior  Officers  set  over  him,  according  to  the  rules  and 
discipline  of  War.  This  Commission  to  continue  in 
force  during  the  pleasure  of  the  President  of  the  United 
States  for  the  time  being. 
"  Given  under  my  hand,  at  the  City  of  Washington,  this 

first  day  of  February,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one 


42  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

thousand  eight  hundred  and  fifteen,  and  in  the  thirty- 
ninth  year  of  the  Independence  of  the  United  States. 
("  L.  S.)  JAMES  MADISON. 

"By  the  President, 

"  Jas.  Monroe,  Secretary  of  War." 

The  summons  which  brought  him  to  the  post  of  dan- 
ger is  of  the  following  form  and  date : 

"  Burlington,  August  12th,  1814. 
"  To  Wm.  Miller,  Capt.  in  the  30th  Inf  7y 

"  Sir  :  — -  You  are  ordered  to  report  yourself  to  the  com- 
manding officer  of  said  regt,  without  delay,  at  Platts- 
burgh.     I  am,  Sir,  with  respect,  &c.  &c, 

"  ELIAS  FASSET, 
Col.  30th  and  Comd.  recruiting." 

His  promotion  to  a  more  responsible  position  subjected 
him  to  some  very  painful  duties ;  and  if  we  may  credit 
the  uniform  testimony  of  his  companions  in  arms,  few 
men  ever  met  the  difficulties  before  him  with  greater 
ability  or  success. 

All  the  circumstances  which  led  to  the  vacation  of  the 
office  to  which  Mr.  Miller  was  promoted  need  not  be 
stated.  But  the  said  company  of  infantry  passed  under 
his  command  in  a  state  of  serious  disorder.  Such  a  state 
of  things  became  the  more  threatening,  as  the  approach 
of  the  enemy  rendered  it  of  the  utmost  importance  that 
each  company  should  be  in  a  state  of  the  greatest  effi- 
ciency possible. 

The  nature  of  the  difficulties  to  be  met,  the  course  he 
pursued,  and  the  result,  are  stated  in  the  following  let- 
ter to  his  wife. 

"  Camp  near  Fort  Moreau,  in  Plattsburgh,  Sept.  4th,  1814.  ) 
Sunday,  9  o'clock  evening.  ) 

"Dear  Lucy  :  —  I  received  your  letter  of  the  30th,  and 
perceived,  by  the  contents,  that  you  received  only  eighty 
dollars.  I  enclosed  100,  and  think  you  must  have  been 
mistaken ;  for,  if  any  person  had  robbed  the  letter,  they 
would  have  taken  the  whole.  My  soldiers  were  paid 
their  money  to-day,  and  I  have  had  to  go  out  twice,  since 
I  have  begun  this  letter,  to  still  the  noise.     I  have  found 


ARMY   DISCIPLINE.  43 

the  company  in  a  very  wayward  situation,  but  believe, 
by  dint  of  application,  I  shall  be  able  to  bring  them  to 
good  subordination.  I  have  had  to  punish  four  or  five 
of  them  very  severely,  and  have  reason  to  believe  that 
they  both  love  and  fear  me.  One  look  is  now  sufficient 
to  quell  any  disorder.  This  Ave  call  a  pay-day,  and, 
once  in  four  days,  we  have  a  whiskey-day ;  on  which 
days,  I  have  six  or  seven  soldiers  who  will  take  a  little 
too  much,  and  then,  of  all  the  devils  in  hell,  I  think 
they  must  exceed  in  deviltry.  But,  while  in  this  situa- 
tion, I  do  not  punish.  After  they  become  sober,  I  then 
punish  them  as  I  told  them  I  would,  and  I  find  it  has  a 
good  effect.  One  punishment  which  I  inflict  on  soldiers 
is  picketing.  First,  a  gallows  is  raised,  about  ten  feet 
high ;  then  their  arms  are  extended  and  fastened  above 
by  ropes ;  then  a  picket  drove  into  the  earth,  on  which 
they  are  to  stand  until  they  receive  sufficient  punish- 
ment ;  and  we  seldom  have  to  punish  them  the  second 
time.  I  had  one  on  the  picket  to-day,  for  threatening  to 
shoot  one  of  my  sergeants,  and  swearing  that  he  would 
not  obey  any  officer  except  the  captain.  This,  in  an  army, 
is  a  great  crime;  therefore,  I  could  do  no  less  than  to 
make  a  public  example.  When  he  was  first  put  up,  he 
was  very  turbulent,  and  hoped  he  might  die  if  he  re- 
pented of  what  he  said;  but,  after  standing  one  hour,  he 
became  as  penitent  as  a  lamb,  and  prayed  and  begged 
to  be  released.  'Oh  dear,  Captain/  said  he,  'do  take 
me  down  —  I  shall  die  !  I  will  never  commit  another 
crime.  For  Heaven's  sake,  release  me!'  I  took  him 
down,  as  you  may  well  believe ;  and  it  wrung  tears  from 
my  eyes  to  see  how  thankful  the  poor  fellow  was ;  .  . 
but  this  is  only  the  bad  picture.  In  my  next  letter,  I 
will  show  you  the  good  side.  The  British  are  within 
ten  miles  of  this  place,  and  we  expect  a  battle  to-morrow ; 
and  I  think  they  must  be  d — d  fools  if  they  do  not  attack 
us,  as  they  are  ten  or  eleven  thousand  strong,  and  we  are 
only  fifteen  hundred ;  but  every  man  is  determined  to  do 
his  duty.  It  may  be  my  lot  to  fall ;  if  I  do,  I  will  fall 
bravely.  Remember,  you  will  never  hear  from  me,  if  I 
am  a  coward.  I  must  close,  as  it  is  almost  11  o'clock. 
u  Remember  your  Wm.  Miller." 


44  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    MILLER. 

This  letter  contains  the  only  instance  of  the  use  of 
language  approaching  to  the  dialect  of  profanity,  which 
has  passed  under  the  writer's  notice,  in  a  large  amount 
of  Mr.  Miller's  manuscripts.  Considering  that  he  was  a 
deist  and  a  soldier  at  the  time,  instances  of  a  more  objec- 
tionable form  might  have  been  expected.  And  this  was 
evidently  owing  to  the  peculiar  vexations  of  the  time. 

This  letter  is  dated  less  than  a  wreek  anterior  to  the 
most  remarkable  and  bloody  battle  of  Plattsburgh.  It 
was  daily  expected  when  he  wrote.  It  seems  almost 
surprising,  in  view  of  the  known  strength  of  the  two 
armies,  that  he  should  have  spoken  as  he  did:  ;i  This  is 
only  the  bad  picture :  in  my  next  letter.  I  will  show  you 
the  good  side  !  ;J 

It  is  impossible  to  give  a  correct  view  of  the  perilous 
position  of  Mr.  Miller  and  his  fellow-soldiers,  during  this 
battle,  without  stating,  to  some  extent,  the  details  of  its 
history.  The  reader  will  not  consider  it  out  of  place,  if 
quotations  from  works  on  such  matters  are  here  made, 
such  as  will  place  the  danger  and  the  courage  of  the 
subject  of  this  memoir  with  other  brave  defenders  of  our 
country,  and  also  the  interposition  of  Providence,  as  it 
was  regarded  at  the  time,  in  their  true  light :  — 

'•It  had  become  an  object  of  solicitude  with  the  bel- 
ligerent parties  on  the  northern  frontier  to  obtain  the 
superiority  on  the  lakes,  indeed,  the  success  of  the  land 
operations  was  considered  to  be  entirely  dependent  on 
that  of  the  marine.  Commodore  Perry  had  already 
established  our  dominion  on  Lake  Erie  :  and  that  of 
Lake  Ontario  had  been  successfully  disputed  by  Com- 
modore Chauncey  with  Sir  James  Yeo.  Vermont  and 
New  York  were  threatened  from  Lake  Champlain.  To 
counteract  hostile  attempts  from  this  quarter,  the  com- 
mand of  the  American  squadron  on  this  lake  was  in- 
trusted to  Commodore  Macdonough.  while  the  defence 
of  Plattsburgh  depended  on  the  exertions  of  General 
Macomb,  and  his  gallant  little  army.  In  September, 
1S14,  an  attack  was  anticipated  on  these  youthful  com- 
manders :  accordingly,  on  the  11th  of  that  month,  the 
expected  event  took  place. 

"  Early  in  the  summer  of  1S14,  the  Canadian  frontier 


BATTLE    OF    LAKE    CHAMPLAIN.  45 

was  reinforced  by  a  large  body  of  troops,  which  ren- 
dered the  position  of  General  Brown  very  critical.  The 
British  government,  relieved  from  its  long  and  severe 
struggle  against  Bonaparte,  could  dispose  of  many  picked 
troops,  disciplined  under  Wellington,  and  they  were  sent 
to  Canada. 

"For  several  days,  the  enemy  had  been  on  his  way 
to  Plattsburgh,  by  land  and  water,  and  it  was  well  under- 
stood that  an  attack  would  be  made  at  the  same  time  by 
his  land  and  naval  forces.  Commodore  Macdonough 
determined  to  await  at  anchor  the  approach  of  the  lat- 
ter. 

"  General  Macomb  was  frequently  advised  to  retreat, 
to  spare  the  blood  and  lives  of  his  apology  for  an  army, 
and  save  Plattsburgh  from  the  fate  of  a  conquered  coun- 
try. But  the  decision  which  he  took,  and  to  which  he 
unwaveringly  adhered,  in  his  apparently  forlorn  situa- 
tion, proved  the  strength  of  his  moral  courage,  and  the 
wisdom  of  his  measures. 

"  At  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,  the  look-out  boat 
announced  the  approach  of  the  enemy.  At  nine,  he 
anchored  in  a  line  ahead,  at  about  three  hundred  yards 
distance  from  the  American  line  :  his  flag-ship,  the  Con- 
fiance,  under  Commodore  Downie,  was  opposed  to  Com- 
modore Macdonough' s  ship,  the  Saratoga ;  the  brig  Lin- 
net was  opposed  to  the  Eagle,  Captain  Robert  Henley ; 
the  enemy's  galleys,  thirteen  in  number,  to  the  schooner, 
sloop,  and  a  division  of  galleys ;  one  of  his  sloops  assist- 
ing his  ship  and  brig,  the  others  assisting  his  galleys; 
the  remaining  American  galleys  being  with  the  Saratoga 
and  Eagle. 

"In  this  situation,  the  whole  force  on  both  sides 
became  engaged ;  the  Saratoga  suffered  much  from  the 
heavy  fire  of  the  Confiance,  though  the  fire  of  the  former 
was  very  destructive  to  her  antagonist.  The  Ticonde- 
roga,  Lieutenant-commander  Cassin,  gallantly  sustained 
her  full  share  of  the  action.  At  half  past  ten  o'clock, 
the  Eagle,  not  being  able  to  bring  her  guns  to  bear,  cut 
her  cable,  and  anchored  in  a  more  eligible  position,  be- 
tween the  Saratoga  and  the  Ticonderoga,  where  she 
very  much  annoyed  the  enemy,  but  rmfortunately  left 
her  commodore  exposed  to  a  galling  fire  from  the  en- 


46  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM   MILLER. 

emy's  brig.  The  guns  of  the  Saratoga  on  the  starboard 
side  being  nearly  all  dismounted  or  not  manageable,  a 
stern  anchor  was  let  go,  the  bower  cable  cut,  and  the  ship 
winded  with  a  fresh  broadside  on  the  Confiance,  which 
soon  after  surrendered.  The  broadside  of  the  Saratoga 
was  then  sprung  to  bear  on  the  brig,  which  surrendered 
within  about  fifteen  minutes. 

"  The  sloop  that  was  opposed  to  the  Eagle  had  struck 
some  time  before,  and  drifted  down  the  line ;  the  sloop 
which  was  with  the  enemy's  galleys  having  also  struck. 
Three  of  them  were  sunk,  and  the  others  pulled  off. 
While  Macdonough' s  galleys  were  in  the  act  of  obeying 
the  signal  to  follow  them,  all  the  vessels  were  reported 
to  him  to  be  in  a  sinking  state ;  it  then  became  neces- 
sary to  countermand  the  signal  to  the  galleys,  and  order 
their  men  to  the  pumps. 

"At  this  time,  not  a  mast  was  standing,  in  either 
squadron,  in  a  condition  to  hold  up  a  sail ;  the  lower 
rigging,  being  nearly  all  shot  away,  hung  down  along  the 
masts. 

"The  action  lasted,  without  intermission,  two  hours 
and  twenty  minutes. 

"  An  attack  made  by  the  British  army,  under  the 
Governor-general  of  the  Canadas,  Sir  George  Provost, 
on  General  Macomb,  commanding  at  Plattsburgh,  owed 
its  defeat  to  the  bravery  of  Commodore  Macdonough  on 
the  lake,  and  the  undaunted  valor  of  Macomb,  com- 
manding on  shore. 

"Sir  George,  having  collected  all  the  disposable  force 
in  Lower  Canada,  with  a  view  of  conquering  the  coun- 
try as  far  as  Crown  Point  and  Ticonderoga,  entered  the 
territories  of  the  United  States,  on  the  first  of  Septem- 
ber, with  fourteen  thousand  men,  and  occupied  the  vil- 
lage of  Champlain.  As  was  before  intimated,  the  cooper- 
ation of  the  naval  force  constituted  an  essential  part  of 
the  arrangement.  The  consequence  was,  that,  instantly 
on  the  discomfiture  of  the  fleet,  the  army  retired  with 
great  precipitation,  having  lost  two  thousand  five  hun- 
dred men,  in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing. 

"  This  victory  was  announced  to  the  department  of 
war,  by  Commodore  Macdonough,  on  the  day  it  was 
obtained,  in  the  following  brief  and  modest  communica- 


LETTER  TO  JUDGE  STANLEY.  47 

tion:  "The  Almighty  has  been  pleased  to  grant  us  a 
signal  victory  on  Lake  Champlain,  in  the  capture  of 
one  frigate,  one  brig,  and  two  sloops  of  war  of  the 
enemy.' 7^ 

It  was  in  the  midst  of  this  scene  of  terror  and  carnage 
that  Mr.  Miller's  courage  was  tried.  Its  effect  on  him  is 
described,  so  far  as  words  can  describe  it,  in  two  letters, 
one  of  which  was  written  even  before  the  battle  ended, 
and  is  addressed  to  Judge  Stanley,  of  Poultney;  the  other 
is  addressed  to  Mrs.  Miller.  As  both  of  these  letters  will 
be  read  with  interest,  they  are  inserted.  The  first  is 
dated  and  reads  as  follows : 

"Fort  Scott,  September  11,  1814.  ) 

20  minutes  past  2  o'clock,  p.  m.  ) 

"Sir:  —  It  is  over!  it  is  done!  the  British  fleet  has 
struck  to  the  American  flag  !  Great  slaughter  on  both 
sides.  They  are  in  plain  view,  where  I  am  now  writing. 
My  God !  the  sight  was  majestic,  it  was  noble,  it  was 
grand.  This  morning,  at  ten  o'clock,  the  British  opened 
a  very  heavy  and  destructive  fire  upon  us,  both  by 
water  and  land ;  their  congreve  rockets  flew  like  hail- 
stones about  us,  and  round  shot  and  grape  from  every 
quarter.  You  have  no  idea  of  the  battle.  Our  force  was 
small,  but  how  bravely  they  fought !  Sir  Lord  George 
Provost  feels  bad.  His  land  force  may  expect  to  meet 
their  fate,  if  our  militia  do  their  duty ;  but  in  time  of 
action,  they  were  not  to  be  seen.  The  action  on  water 
lasted  only  two  hours  and  ten  minutes ;  the  firing  from 
their  batteries  has  but  just  ceased  —  ours  is  still  continu- 
ing ;  the  small  arms  now  are  just  coming  to  action.  I 
have  no  time  to  write  any  more ;  you  must  conceive  what 
we  feel,  for  I  cannot  describe  it.  I  am  satisfied  that  I  can 
fight;  I  know  I  am  no  coward;  therefore,  call  on  Mr. 
Loomis  and  drink  my  health,  and  I  will  pay  the  shot. 
Three  of  my  men  are  wounded  —  by  a  shell  which  burst 
within  two  feet  of  me.  The  boat  from  the  fleet,  which 
has  just  landed  under  our  fort,  says  the  British  commo- 
dore is  killed.  Out  of  300  on  board  their  ship,  25  remain 
alive.     Some  of  our  officers,  who  have  been  on  board, 

g^         *  "  Glory  of  America." 


48  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

say  the  blood  is  knee  deep.  Their  force  we  have  taken 
consists  of  one  ship,  36  guns ;  one  brig  of  18  guns,  and 
two  sloops. 

"Huzza!  huzza!  Twenty  or  thirty  British  prisoners, 
taken  by  our  militia,  have  just  arrived  in  fort.  I  can 
write  no  more,  for  the  time  grows  dubious. 

"Yours  forever, 

"Wm.  Miller. 

"Give  my  compliments  to  all,  and  send  this  to  my  wife.55 

If  it  should  be  necessary,  the  forbearance  of  the  reader 
is  again  appealed  to,  for  noticing  an  incident,  which,  if 
it  is  of  no  other  value,  gave  the  greatest  possible  interest 
to  the  letter  of  Mrs.  Miller,  in  the  estimation  of  herself 
and  family,  at  the  time  of  its  reception.  It  is  one  of 
those  mysterious  phenomena,  the  occurrence  of  which 
it  is  hard  to  deny,  while  the  principle  or  agency  from 
which  they  spring  it  is  not  easy  fully  to  explain.  The 
battle  of  Plattsburgh  was  fought  on  Sunday.  The  state 
of  Mrs.  Miller's  health  was  such  as  to  make  her  interest  in 
the  issue  of  the  battle  of  the  most  affecting  and  absorb- 
ing character.  She  was  near  giving  birth  to  a  son,  who 
is  now  living,  and  bears  the  strongest  resemblance  to  his 
father  of  any  one  of  the  children.  If  there  are  any  cir- 
cumstances which  would  make  it  proper  that  an  almost 
supernatural  intercourse  might  be  permitted  between  two 
souls  which  Heaven  has  united,  it  must  be  at  such  a 
time.  While  the  battle  was  raging,  nearly  a  hundred 
miles  distant,  Mrs.  Miller  became  strangely  affected.  A 
hitherto  unexperienced  and  unaccountable  presentation 
was  made  to  her  mind,  which  to  her  was  a  demonstra- 
tion of  what  was  going  on  where  she  felt  that  so  much 
was  at  stake.  She  was  nearly  frantic  with  agony,  so 
that  the  friends  who  were  with  her  became  seriously 
alarmed  on  her  account.  Argument,  ridicule,  all  the 
modes  they  could  think  of,  to  restore  her  usual  cheerful- 
ness and  self-command,  were  alike  unavailing.  She 
could  think  and  speak  of  nothing  but  the  "  trouble  at 
the  north  I  " 

The  form  of  this  presentiment  was  very  simple,  but 
certainly  it  was  highly  emblematic.  As  she  expressed 
it, —  "A  dark,  furious,  smothering  tornado  rushed  down 


TIDINGS    OF    VICTORY.  49 

on  a  poor,  unsheltered  flock  of  little  birds  ! "  There 
was  ground  enough  for  such  a  comparison  in  the 
antagonist  forces,  though  there  was  anything  but  an 
apprehended  sweep  of  a  destructive  tornado  in  the  last 
letter  of  her  husband.  But  the  coincidence  of  time  was 
the  mystery. 

The  day  passed;  her  agony  subsided,  but  not  her 
fears.  The  friends  with  her  thought  she  had  had  a 
nervous  time,  or  was  slightly  insane.  Nothing  was 
heard  from  the  scene  of  conflict  at  the  north  till  near 
the  close  of  Monday.  The  first  intimation  of  the  tidings, 
to  that  family,  was  the  strong  peal  of  the  village  bell. 
A  member  of  the  family  was  sent  out  to  inquire  its 
meaning,  and  the  glad  shout  of  victory  was  heard  on 
every  hand.  A  fleet  horse  and  rider  had  brought  the 
news,  and  passed  on  south ! 

The  sound  of  victory  was  most  welcome.  That  was 
all  that  patriotism  might  ask.  But  family  affection 
could  not  rest  till  it  had  learned  the  price  of  victory. 
An  old,  iron-hearted  soldier  has  remarked,  that  "  the 
next  calamity  to  a  defeat,  in  war,  is  a  triumph  !  'n  Some 
must  have  fallen  at  Plattsburgh.  And  how  many  anxious 
hearts  awaited  the  arrival  of  the  next  mail  from  the  seat 
of  war !  That  mail  brought  to  Mrs.  Miller  the  letter 
before  referred  to.     It  reads  as  follows  : 

"  Fort  Scott,  September  12,  1814.  ) 

7  o'clock,  morning.  \ 

"Dear  Wife  :  — Yesterday  was  a  day  of  great  joy.  We 
have  conquered  !  we  have  drove  them !  About  nine 
o'clock  a.  m.,  yesterday,  the  British  fleet  fired  a  salute 
as  they  passed  Cumberland-head;  it  was  a  token  for 
a  general  engagement.  About  twenty  minutes  after, 
they  hove  in  sight.  How  majestic,  how  noble,  our  fleet 
lay  in  Plattsburgh  Bay;  and,  like  a  saucy  Yankee, 
paid  no  attention  to  their  royal  salute  !  The  British 
fleet  still  bearing  down  upon  us,  bold  as  a  lion,  in  a 
moment  we  were  all  prepared  for  action.  The  British 
had  thrown  up  a  number  of  batteries  on  all  sides  of  us. 
The  next  minute  the  cannon  began  playing  —  spitting 
their  fire  in  every  quarter.  What  a  scene !  All  was 
dreadful !  — nothing  but  roaring  and  groaning,  for  about 


50  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    MILLER. 

six  or  eight  hours.  I  cannot  describe  to  you  our  situ- 
ation. The  fort  I  was  in  was  exposed  to  every  shot. 
Bombs,  rockets,  and  shrapnell  shells,  fell  thick  as  hail- 
stones. Three  of  my  men  were  wounded,  and  one 
killed;  but  none  that  were  from  Poultney,  or  that  quarter. 
In  one  hour  and  forty-five  minutes,  the  enemy's  fleet 
was  conquered.  My  God!  what  a  slaughter  on  all  sides  ! 
—  out  of  300  on  board  of  one  ship,  24  only  remained 
unhurt !  I  cannot  describe  to  you  the  general  joy.  At 
sundown,  our  forts  fired  a  national  salute,  accompanied 
by  a  tune  called  *  Yankee  Doodle,'  and  each  gun  was 
loaded  with  an  eighteen  pound  shot.  This  soon  fright- 
ened our  foe  to  that  degree,  that,  this  morning,  at  day- 
break, not  a  soul  was  to  be  seen ;  and  they  went  off  in 
so  great  a  hurry  that  not  one  article  of  their  baggage 
could  they  carry  away.  Some  they  burnt,  and  some 
they  left  behind.  Their  loss,  in  killed  and  wounded,  is 
immense,  besides  one  hundred  taken  prisoners,  and  three 
or  four  hundred  deserters.  Our  loss  was  not  so  great, 
but  considerable.  Every  officer  and  soldier  is  now  sing- 
ing for  joy,  and  there  is  nothing  now  heard  but  the  11th 
day  of  September,  and  Lord  George  Provost  retreating 
for  Canada.  You  may  well  conceive,  by  my  uncon- 
nected mode  of  writing,  that  I  am  as  joyful  as  any  of 
them.  A  naval  and  land  engagement,  within  the  com- 
pass of  a  mile  or  two,  and  fifteen  or  twenty  thousand 
engaged  at  one  and  the  same  time,  is  superior  to  any- 
thing my  eyes  ever  beheld  before.  How  grand,  how 
noble,  and  yet  how  awful !  The  roaring  of  camion,  the 
bursting  of  bombs,  the  whizzing  of  balls,  the  popping 
of  small  arms,  the  cracking  of  timbers,  the  shrieks  of 
the  dying,  the  groans  of  the  wounded,  the  commands  of 
the  officers,  the  swearing  of  soldiers,  the  smoke,  the 
fire,  everything  conspires  to  make  the  scene  of  a  battle 
both  awful  and  grand ! 

"  The  fort  I  was  in  was  on  the  bank  of  the  lake,  and 
in  plain  view  of  everything  which  passed. 

"  Remember  me  to  all  my  friends;  and,  in  the  mean 
time,  accept  of  me,  as  I  am,  faithfully  yours, 

"Wm.  Miller." 

The  triumph  of  the  American  arms  at  Plattsburgh  was 
truly  "  a  signal "  one.     And  if  ever  it  was  proper  to 


CONTRAST    OF   FORCE.  51 

ascribe  such  an  event  to  "the  Almighty,"  it  was  proper 
on  this  occasion.  It  is  not  very  often  the  case,  however, 
that  an  acknowledgment  of  this  kind  marks  the  official 
account  of  a  battle,  as  it  does  that  of  Commodore 
Macdonough.  It  was  perfectly  in  harmony  with  his 
well-known  deportment  at  the  time,  and  with  the  com- 
mon feeling  which  pervaded,  in  an  unusual  degree,  the 
whole  United  States  force  engaged.  Napoleon  had 
beaten  the  mightiest  armies  that  Europe  had  ever 
raised,  in  an  almost  uninterrupted  succession  of  battles, 
during  more  than  ten  years.  The  troops  of  England, 
with  their  allies,  had  now  the  reputation  of  having  at 
last  beaten  Napoleon.  And  these  English  troops,  with 
overwhelming  numbers  in  their  favor,  entered  the  field 
against  those  of  the  United  States,  at  Plattsburgh.  What, 
then,  in  all  human  estimation,  had  this  "  apology  for  an 
army  ??  to  expect  ? 

One  of  the  most  sublime  and  appalling  scenes,  in  which 
it  falls  to  the  lot  of  man  to  enact  a  part,  is  presented  by 
the  deadly  encounter  of  fleets  and  armies.  The  attain- 
ment of  a  position;  the  skill  and  courage  required,  in 
each  division  of  the  body  to  be  brought  into  action,  in 
order  to  work  out  the  plan  on  which  the  success  of  the 
day  is  presumed  to  depend ;  the  ability  and  promptness 
needed  to  comprehend  and  execute  any  manoeuvre,  the 
necessity  of  which  may  not  be  foreseen ;  the  success  of  a 
stratagem  or  a  surprise,  are  so  many  points,  where  the 
strength  of  the  hostile  forces  is  equal,  in  which  the 
chances  usually  hang  so  much  in  doubt,  that  each  man 
of  the  thousands  in  arms  must  feel  his  danger,  in  the 
same  proportion  that  he  feels  his  insufficiency  to  direct 
all  to  the  desired  result ;  and  this  sense  of  insufficiency 
must  naturally  dispose  each  one  to  look  for  aid  to  a 
power  above  that  of  man.  Such  a  feeling  is  the  usual 
accompaniment  of  a  battle  where  the  chances  are  equally 
balanced. 

But  when  the  strength  of  the  forces  is  known  to  be 
very  unequal,  that  party  in  the  contest  where  the  exter- 
nal weakness  is  felt,  after  all  is  done  that  devoted 
patriotism,  union,  intelligence  and  skill  can  accomplish, 
must  faint,  unless  they  are  sustained  by  the  hope  of  aid 
from  on  high ;  while  the  party  which  feel  confident  in 


52  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    3IILLER. 

their  own  resources  often  become  profanely  arrogant,  and 
fatally  presumptuous.  It  is  seldom  that  such  an  im- 
pressive exhibition  of  devout  hope  in  God  on  one  side. 
and  such  a  painful  exhibition  of  self-confidence  on  the 
other  side,  demands  our  attention;  as  were  manifested  in 
the  battle  of  Plattsburgh. 

When  the  hour  of  deadly  strife  had  come,  every  prep- 
aration having  been  made  for  action  on  the  American 
side,  and  the  attention  of  all  on  board  the  Saratoga  was 
called  to  the  commodore,  it  is  said  that,  in  the  stillness, 
which  was  soon  to  give  place  to  scenes  of  tumult  so 
unsuitable  to  the  day.  the  voice  of  Macdonough  was 
raised  in  fervent  prayer  to  God.  for  the  fleet,  the  armv, 
and  the  success  of  the  American  cause.  But  this  was 
only  an  expression  of  the  deep  feeling  of  ever}'  heart. 
In  such  circumstances;  the  stoutest;  and  even  the  pro- 
fane, felt  the  propriety  of  prayer :  for  all  were  humbled 
before  God.  This  sense  of  its  propriety,  if  nothing  else, 
gave  them  a  new  feeling  of  strength  for  the  conflict. 
And  when  the  day  closed  with  an  assurance  of  victory 
—  for  it  was  thought  to  be  hardly  possible;  even  when 
the  English  fleet  had  struck  their  colors — the  hand  of 
God  seemed  to  be  so  manifest  to  all.  that  the  hardest 
specimens  of  human  nature  hi  the  fleet  and  army  were 
seen  in  tears,  while  all  were  constrained  to  acknowledge 
their  sense  of  providential  favor. 

The  result  of  this  battle  deeply  impressed  the  mind  of 
Mr.  Miller.  He  refers  to  it,  in  one  of  his  published 
works,  in  these  words : 

"  Many  occurrences  served  to  weaken  my  confidence 
in  the  correctness  of  deistical  principles.  I  was  led 
frequently  to  compare  this  country  to  that  of  the  children 
of  Israel,  before  whom  God  drove  out  the  inhabitants  of 
their  land.  It  seemed  to  me  that  the  Supreme  Being 
must  have  watched  over  the  interests  of  this  country  in 
an  especial  manner,  and  delivered  us  from  the  hands  of 
our  enemies.  I  was  particularly  impressed  with  this 
view  when  I  was  in  the  battle  of  Plattsburgh.  when,  with 
1500  regulars,  and  about  4000  volunteers,  we  defeated 
the  British,  who  were  15.000  strong;  we  being  also  suc- 
cessful, at  the  same  time,  in  an  engagement  with  the 


GENEROUS    CONDUCT    OF    AMERICANS.  53 

British  fleet  on  the  lake.  At  the  commencement  of  the 
battle,  we  looked  upon  our  own  defeat  as  almost  certain : 
and  yet  we  were  victorious.  So  surprising  a  result, 
against  such  odds,  did  seem  to  me  like  the  work  of  a 
mightier  power  than  man/"' 

In  another  place  it  will  be  seen  that  arrangements  for 
celebrating  the  anniversary  of  this  battle  gave  rise  to  the 
Christian  effort  which  arrested  the  attention  of  Mr. 
Miller,  at  the  time  of  his  conversion. 

What  passed  on  board  the  English  fleet,  or  in  their 
camp,  as  a  contrast  to  what  took  place  on  the  part 
of  the  Americans,  has  not  been  stated.  Its  statement  is 
not  necessary.  But  as  it  was  assigned  to  Captain  Miller, 
with  other  officers,  to  prepare  the  body  of  the  English 
commodore  for  its  interment,  it  may  be  remarked,  in 
passing,  that  the  sentiment,  said  to  have  been  rashly 
expressed  by  that  personage,  when  he  took  his  accus- 
tomed drink  at  the  close  of  his  last  meal,^  imprecated 
such  a  termination  of  his  career  as  he  actually 
experienced.  The  first  broadside  from  the  American 
fleet  split  off  a  massive  splinter  from  a  spar  or  timber  of 
the  Confiance.  and  dashed  it  with  such  force  against 
Commodore  Downie's  person,  in  the  region  of  the  vitals, 
that  he  never  breathed  after  he  fell.  It  literally  knocked 
the  breath  out  of  him. 

The  generous  sympathy  shown  to  the  wounded  of 
their  enemies,  and  the  honor  paid  to  the  dead,  by  the 
Americans,  was  as  worthy  of  remembrance  as  the 
bravery  with  which  they  fought.  Officers  of  the  same 
rank  received  the  same  honors,  without  regard  to  the 
nation  in  whose  service  they  fell.  Mrs.  Downie,  who 
tarried  in  Canada,  expressed  her  high  sense  of  the 
honors  paid  to  her  husband,  by  an  affecting  and  appro- 
priate acknowledgment. 

The  battle  of  Plattsburgh  was  decisive  as  to  any  further 
hostilities  in  that  quarter.  A  short  armistice,  arranged 
by  the  generals  of  the  opposite  forces,  was  followed  by 
the  ratification  of  peace.     But  the  troops  were  still  kept 

#  The  sentiment,  as  uniformly  stated,  was  to  this  import :  —  "If  he 
did  not  eat  his  next  meal  in  Plattsburgh,  he  hoped  he  might  eat  it  in 
hell !  '} 


54  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

at  their  post;  and  scenes  as  painful,  if  not  so  destructive 
of  human  life,  as  those  just  noticed,  passed  in  the  Ameri- 
can camp.  One  of  ~\Ir.  Miller's  letters  speaks  in  becoming 
terms  of  the  scenes  referred  to.  Other  things  are  men- 
tioned in  the  same  letter,  that  might  be  omitted;  but  as 
the  persons  whose  names  are  mentioned  have  passed 
away,  and  as  a  prominent  trait  in  the  character  of  the 
one  who  wrote  the  letter  is  here  exhibited  in  its  natural 
tenderness,  the  whole  letter  is  inserted. 

"  Pittsburgh,  Oct.  28,  1514.  I 

7  o'clock,  evening,    j 

"Dear  Lucy:  —  Again  have  I  resumed  my  pen.  in 
hopes  to  beguile  those  lonesome  hours,  (which,  although 
in  camp.  I  assure  you  are  not  a  few.)  In  my  last 
letter,  sent  by  David  Wyman,  of  Westhaven,  I  informed 
you  of  the  intended  execution  of  a  few  criminals. 
There  were  six  of  them  launched  into  the  other  world 
in  a  hurry,  to-day.  and  I  think  I  had  rather  see  one 
hundred  fall  in  action. 

"You.  perhaps,  remember  Spencer:  he  was  a  ser- 
geant, and  gained  the  esteem  of  all  his  fellows.  He  is 
no  more.  He  died  yesterday  of  a  fever  —  as  is  sup- 
posed—  but  I  believe  that  a  hopless  passion  which  he 
had  formed  for  Charlotte  Hyde  hastened  his  end.  I 
went  to  see  him  a  few  hours  before  his  death  :  he  was 
rational,  and  appeared  to  be  warned  of  his  approaching 
fate :  he  mentioned  his  friends  in  Poultney :  he  men- 
tioned your  name :  regretted  that  he  could  not  see  you 
once  more  :  but  when  he  was  a  going  to  mention  the 
name  of  Charlotte,  his  speech  failed  him.  He  could 
only  squeeze  my  hand,  and  weep.  I  pitied  him,  from  my 
soul.  'Young  man,'  said  I,  -I  know  what  you  would 
say —  endeavor  to  recover  your  health.  You  shall  have 
a  furlough,  and  go  and  see — '  .  .  .  •  Ah!  no/  said  he 
'  it  is  all  over  with  me.  A  few  hours,  and  I  shall  be  no 
more.'  He  hung  to  my  hand  :  begged  of  me  not  to  leave 
him:  but  my  duty  forced  me,  and.  with  difficulty.  I  tore 
myself  from  his  grasp.  I  had  him  decently  interred: 
and  if  any  person  was  a  mourner.  I  was  one. 

u  Perhaps  it  would  not  be  proper  to  mention  this  to 
Charlotte.     You  can  do  as  you  think  best,  as  I  believe 


HORROR    OF   ANNIHILATION.  55 

you  are  capable  of  judging  as  correctly  as  I  can.  The 
remainder  of  the  soldiers  from  Poultney  and  that  quarter 
are  all  well. 

"I  shall  send  this  letter  by  Elnathan  Phelps,  Jr.  I 
have  sent  to  the  post-office  for  a  letter  this  evening,  and 
the  mail  had  not  arrived ;  therefore,  no  letter  from  my 
Lucy.  How  unpropitious  are  these  strong  winds  !  —  or  is 
my  Lucy  unkind  1 

"But  a  short  time,  and,  like  Spencer,  I  shall  be  no 
more.  It  is  a  solemn  thought.  Yet,  could  I  be  sure  of 
one  other  life,  there  would  be  nothing  terrific ;  but  to  go 
out  like  an  extinguished  taper,  is  insupportable  —  the 
thought  is  doleful.  No  !  rather  let  me  cling  to  that  hope 
which  warrants  a  never-ending  existence  ;  a  future 
spring,  where  troubles  shall  cease,  and  tears  find  no  con- 
veyance ;  where  never-ending  spring  shall  flourish,  and 
love,  pure  as  the  driven  snow,  rest  in  every  breast. 

"Dear  Lucy,  do  write  to  me,  and  let  me  know  how 
you  pass  your  time. 

"Good-evening.     I  am  troubled.  Wm,  Miller." 

As  Mr.  Miller  has  expressed  his  horror  of  the  infidel 
doctrine  of  annihilation  in  the  above  letter,  it  may  be 
proper  here  to  show  that  it  was  this  repulsive  feature  of 
deism  which  constituted  the  greatest  difficulty  connected 
with  it  in  his  mind.  This  fact  is  thus  stated,  in  one  of 
his  published  works : 

"  Before  the  close  of  this  period,  however,"  [the  period 
of  his  deistical  life]  "I  began  to  suspect  that  deism 
tended  to  a  belief  of  annihilation,  which  was  always 
very  abhorrent  to  my  feelings.  In  the  fall  of  1812,  as  I 
was  returning  to  Poultney  from  the  court  at  Rutland,  in 
company  with  Judge  Stanley,  I  asked  him  his  opinion 
respecting  our  condition  in  another  state.  He  replied  by 
comparing  it  to  that  of  a  tree,  which  flourishes  for  a  time, 
and  turns  again  to  earth ;  and  to  that  of  a  candle,  which 
burns  to  nothing.  I  was  then  satisfied  that  deism  was 
inseparably  connected  with,  and  did  tend  to,  the  denial 
of  a  future  existence.  And  I  thought  to  myself,  that 
rather  than  embrace  such  a  view,  I  should  prefer  the 
heaven  and  hell  of  the  Scriptures,  and  take  my  chance 
6 


56  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

respecting  them.     Still,  I  could  not  regard  the  Bible  as 
inspired." 

Another  of  his  letters  from  the  army  is  presented  to 
the  reader,  rather  to  exhibit  the  ingenuity  of  its  writer 
in  administering  a  rebuke  for  what  he  supposed  to  be  an 
omission,  on  the  part  of  his  wife,  to  forward  the  usual 
epistle  to  Camp  Plattsburgh.  It  will  be  seen,  that  an 
arrangement  had  been  made  for  a  weekly  correspond- 
ence. The  large  bundle  of  letters  written  by  him.  in 
fulfilment  of  this  arrangement,  is  still  preserved;  each 
letter  is  numbered,  and  the  whole  furnishes  an  interest- 
ing illustration  of  the  punctuality  and  order  he  carried 
into  all  the  departments  of  life.  This  letter  expresses 
the  tender  interest  he  felt  in  those  at  home.  It  shows 
that  his  pleasantry  could  adapt  itself  to  the  most  serious 
subjects.  And  it  undoubtedly  presents  a  correct  state- 
ment of  his  religious  views  at  the  time. 

It  should  be  stated,  that  the  letter  which  he  mourns 
the  absence  of,  and  which  led  him  to  suppose  his  wife 
must  be  "no  more,*'  was  sent  by  a  lad  who  expected 
to  leave  Whitehall  and  go  to  Plattsburgh  by  water,  so 
as  to  get  there  about  the  time  of  the  arrival  of  the 
mail.  A  storm  detained  the  vessel  some  days,  so  that 
the  letter  was  not  received  as  intended.  This  afflicting 
letter  —  it  is  afflicting,  full  of  irony  as  it  is  —  reads  as 
follows : 

"Camp  Plattsburgh,  Nov  nth,  1S14. 

"  Dear  Lucy  :  —  Have  you  departed  this  life  ?  Are  you 
gone  to  the  world  of  spirits?  (I  almost  fancy  that, 
while  I  am  writing,  your  unembodied  spirit  is  hovering 
aromid  me.)  Or,  are  you  so  engaged  that  you  could 
not  devote  one  hour  in  a  week  to  your  humble  servant  ? 

"  The  following  are  the  words  you  wrote  me  not  long 
since,  to  wit, — l  If  I  am  alive,  I  shall  write  to  you  weekly, 
and  put  a  letter  into  the  post-office  every  Monday  morn- 
ing :  '  and,  ever  since  "Wednesday  noon,  I  have  been 
dressed  in  mourning.  Shall  I  ever  see  my  Lucy  again  ? 
I  have  often  exclaimed,  Ah  !  no ;  she  could  not  tell  me  a 
falsehood.  She  must  be  dead!  "What  can  I  write,  if 
she  is  gone  ?  I  cannot  write  anything ;  she  cannot  hear 
me.    I  can  only  write  to  my  children,  into  whose  hands 


SINGULAR  LETTER  TO  MRS.  MILLER.         57 

I  hope  this  letter  will  fall,  — '  Dear  children,  you  have  lost 
your  mother,  and  but  a  little  while,  and  your  father  must 
follow;  perhaps,  before  you  receive  this,  he  will  be  no 
more;  prepare,  then,  my  children,  to  meet  the  frowns  of 
fortune,  and  learn,  in  your  youth,  to  repel  the  shafts  of 
adversity.  Your  present  time  ought  to  be  devoted  to  your 
studies.  Remember  the  lives  of  your  parents  were  short, 
and  you  know  not  the  hour  you  will  be  called  for.  Life 
is  uncertain,  and  you  ought  so  to  live  as,  when  you 
come  to  die,  that  not  one  reflection  will  pass  your  mind 
but  that  you  have  so  lived  as  to  merit  the  good  will  of 
all  good  men.  Your  first  study  ought  to  lead  you  to  look 
up  to  the  Supreme  Being  as  the  Author  of  all  things. 
When  you  learn  his  attributes,  or  as  much  as  man  is  to 
know,  you  will  ever  keep  in  mind  that  he  sees  every 
action  of  your  life,  knows  every  thought,  and  hears 
every  word.  If  you  follow  this  rule,  you  cannot  go  far 
astray.  You  may  be  led,  for  a  moment,  into  vices  that 
human  nature  is  subject  to;  but  you  cannot  materially 
err,  for,  in  your  cooler  moments,  conscience  will  point 
to  you  the  road  you  ought  to  follow.  You  must  never 
give  way  to  adversity,  nor  be  raised  up  in  prosperity ; 
for  pride  is  equally  as  dangerous  as  cowardice ;  for  to 
give  way  to  the  first  shows  a  weak  and  cowardly  mind, 
and  the  latter  indicates  a  vain  and  haughty  spirit.  Be- 
gin the  world  as  you  would  wish  you  had  when  you 
come  to  die  ;  endeavor  to  get  the  good  will  of  allf  people : 
for  it  is  better  to  have  the  good  than  the  ill  will  of  even 
a  dog.  Search  not  too  far  for  vain  and  empty  baubles ; 
it  is  a  more  solid  pleasure  "to  do  as  you  would  be  done 
by."  Yet,  in  this,  you  will  find  the  ingratitude  of  man. 
Put  not  too  much  dependence  on  human  favor  ;  for  there 
are  but  few  who  walk  the  narrow  path.  Remember, 
my  children,  that  your  father  has  vainly  sought  the 
friendship  of  man,  and  never  could  he  discover  any 
friendship  only  where  there  was  a  dependence.  In  the 
small  circle  in  which  I  now  move,  this  rule  is  manifest. 
Here  are  a  hundred  persons  that  depend  upon  me  for 
every  comfort,  and  each  one  professes  a  real  love  for  me. 
Yet,  if  I  was  a  citizen,  or  one  of  their  own  rank.  I  could 
never  expect  more  than  common  friendship.  Indeed, 
they  seem  to  me  like  children,  and:  together  with  you3 


58 


LIFE    OF   WILLIAM    MILLER. 


claim  my  highest  support.  If  my  Lucy  is  no  more,  and  I 
am  doomed  to  lead  a  solitary  life,  you  must  calculate 
to  live  for  yourselves.  What  pecuniary  help  I  can  afford 
you,  I  will ;  and  I  expect  it  will  be  but  small.  What 
little  worldly  store  I  have  left  at  home  may  be  divided 
equally  among  you  when  you  arrive  to  years  of  discre- 
tion. In  the  mean  time,  I  hope,  William,  that  you  will 
set  so  good  an  example  to  your  brothers  and  sisters,  as 
that,  if  they  follow  it,  shall  insure  them  peace,  love,  and 
friendship  here,  and  happiness  in  the  world  to  come. 
May  you  remember  the  virtues  of  your  parents,  and  for- 
get their  ices  :  this  is  the  constant  prayer  of  your  loving 
father,  Wm.  Miller.* 


j 


"  If  Lucy  is  no  more,  or  if  she  has  forgotten  Wm.  Mil- 
ler, then  this  letter  is  directed  to  Wm.  S.  Miller,  his  old- 
est son." 

Mr.  Miller  remained  at  Plattsburgh  as  late  as  Febru- 
ary of  1815  ;  and,  although  the  English  had  removed 
their  forces  into  Canada,  so  that  there  was  no  fighting 
with  them,  there  were  some  bad  Yankees,  whose  cases 
called  for  occasional  punishment.  In  the  "  Register  of 
men  tried  and  punished  or  pardoned/'  kept  by  our  then 
military  friend,  we  find  nothing  more  severe  inflicted, 
by  any  court  martial  of  which  "  Capt.  Miller  "  was  "Pres- 
ident," than  this  :  "S—  P— ,  Private.  Jan.  20,  1815. 
Regt.  C.  Martial.  Crime  :  disobedience  of  orders,  neglect 
of  duty,  and  stealing.  Sentence :  to  be  ducked  in  the 
lake,  picketed  two  hours,  and  have  his  whiskey  rations 
stopped  sixty  days."  Rather  a  hard  sentence  for  Jan- 
uary ! 

In  prosecuting  the  business  designated  in  the  follow- 
ing "Order"  of  General  Macomb,  he  probably  had  an 
opportunity  to  make  a  flying  visit  to  Poultney : 

"  Head-quarters,  Plattsburgh,  3d  February,  1815. 
"Orders.  —  Capt.  Miller,  of  the  30th  Regt.,  will  pro- 
ceed immediately  to  Whitehall,  and  procure  clothing  for 
the  requisition  of  the  commanding  officer  of  his  regt. 

"ALEX.  MACOMB." 

Mr.  Miller's  connection  with  the  scenes  of  military  life 


THE    PRAYING    SERGEANT.  59 

were  drawing  to  a  close.  Peace  had  already  been  rati- 
fied ;  and,  shortly  after  the  news  of  that  event  arrived, 
he  received  permission  to  take  a  last  farewell  of  the  act- 
ual service  of  a  calling  which  was  as  uncongenial  with 
the  aspirations  of  his  soul  as  any  of  the  scenes  of  his 
former  life  had  been.  The  permit — perhaps  it  should 
be  called  a  discharge — is  in  this  form: 

"Burlington,  June  18,  1815. 
"  Capt.  W.  Miller  has  permission  to  depart  till  further 
orders,  he  having  complied  with  the  General  Orders,  as 
respects  the  five  year  men.     By  command, 
"JNO.  H.  BURTON, 

uLt.  &f  Adft2tothlnfy." 

A  few  reflections  on  this  period  of  Mr.  Miller's  life, 
and  the  mention  of  an  incident  or  two  of  some  interest, 
must  close  this  chapter.  Everybody  is  familiar  with 
the  fact,  that  the  army  is  a  bad  school  of  morality.  In- 
temperance, licentiousness,  gambling,  fighting,  stealing, 
profanity,  and  Sabbath-breaking,  are  the  common  vices 
of  army  life.  It  was  the  constant  practice  of  these  vices 
by  those  around  him,  which  sickened  Mr.  Miller  of  their 
society.  And  that  he  should  escape  entirely  from  the 
contamination,  would  be  too  much  to  expect.  However, 
it  is  both  a  matter  of  surprise,  and  highly  creditable  to 
him,  that  his  moral  integrity  and  habits  were  not  affected 
to  a  hopeless  extent.  There  were,  however,  some  re- 
deeming traits  to  the  too  generally  dark  moral  picture 
of  army  life.  There  were  a  few  men  in  the  30th  regi- 
ment of  infantry  who  were  known  as  men  of  prayer, 
and  undoubted  piety.  And  an  incident  in  their  history, 
which  Mr.  Miller  has  often  spoken  of  with  great  interest, 
should  be  mentioned.  One  of  these  praying  men,  if 
memory  has  not  failed  in  the  case,  was  Sergeant  Willey. 
His  tent  was  occasionally  used  for  the  purpose  of  hold- 
ing a  prayer-meeting.  On  one  of  these  occasions,  when 
Mr.  Miller  was  "  the  officer  for  the  day,"  he  saw  a  light 
in  this  tent,  and,  wishing  to  know  what  was  going  on, 
as  his  duty  required,  he  drew  near,  and  heard  the  voice 
of  prayer.  He  said  nothing  at  the  time ;  but,  the  next 
day,  on  recollecting  it,  he  thought  it  was  a  good  oppor- 
6* 


60  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    MILLER. 

tunity  to  try  the  sergeant's  piety,  and  indulge  his  own 
relish  for  a  joke3  by  calling  Sergeant  Willey  to  account  for 
having  his  tent  occupied  by  a  gambling  party  the  night 
before.  "When  the  sergeant  appeared.  Captain  Miller 
affected  great  seriousness,  and  spoke  in  a  tone  bordering 
on  severity,  as  follows  :  — "  You  know.  Sergeant  Willey. 
that  it  is  contrary  to  the  army  regulations  to  have  any 
gambling  in  the  tents  at  night.  And  I  was  very  sorry 
to  see  your  tent  lit  up.  for  that  purpose,  last  night.  We 
cannot  have  any  gambling  at  such  times.  You  must 
put  a  stop  to  it  at  once.  I  hope  I  shall  not  have  to 
speak  to  you  again  about  it  ! :) 

The  poor  sergeant  stood  thunderstruck,  for  a  moment, 
to  hear  such  an  imputation  cast  on  himself  and  his  asso- 
ciates. And  then,  hardly  daring  to  look  up.  he  replied, 
with  the  most  touching  simplicity,  and  in  a  manner 
which  showed  that  he  was  alike  unwilling  to  suffer  the 
scandal  of  entertaining  gamblers,  or  to  make  a  parade 
of  his  devotions.  "  We  were  not  gambling,  sir  !  " 

Capt.  Miller  was  touched  with  his  appearance.  But. 
still  affecting  greater  severity  than  at  first,  being  deter- 
mined to  press  him  to  a  confession,  he  said  to  the  ser- 
geant. "  Yes.  you  were  gambling  !  And  it  won't  do  ! 
What  else  could  you  have  your  tent  lighted  up  for.  all 
the  evening,  if  you  were  not  gambling  ]  ;; 

Sergeant  Willey  now  felt  himself  under  the  necessity 
of  being  a  little  more  explicit,  and  answered,  in  a  man- 
ner deeply  expressive  of  his  grief  and  innocence.  ;*  We 
were  praying,  sir  !  "; 

Capt.  Miller,  by  this  time,  was  almost  in  tears  :  and 
indicating,  by  a  motion  of  his  hand,  that  he  was  satis- 
fied, and  that  the  praying  sergeant  might  withdraw, 
he  continued  alone  for  some  time,  sensibly  affected  by 
the  courage  manifested  by  these  Christians  in  that 
ungodly  camp,  by  the  becoming  deportment  of  their 
representative  under  such  a  serious  scandal,  and  by  the 
doubtful  course  he  had  taken  in  reference  to  them. 

There  are  but  two  particulars  on  which  the  writer  has 
ever  heard  a  hint  that  the  subject  of  this  memoir  be- 
came in  the  least  corrupted  in  his  habits,  during  his 
connection  with  the  army.  On  one  of  these  particulars. 
he  has  written  as  follows  : 


A    PEACEMAKER.  61 

"  One  day  in  May,  1816, 1  detected  myself  in  the  act  of 
taking  the  name  of  God  in  vain  —  a  habit  I  had  acquired 
in  the  service ;  and  I  was  instantly  convicted  of  its  sin- 
fulness.'? 

The  other  vice  of  his  army  life  was  that  of  gambling, 
particularly,  if  not  exclusively,  in  the  use  of  cards.  To 
what  extent  he  indulged  the  habit,  cannot  be  stated  ;  but, 
on  returning  home,  at  the  close  of  the  war,  he  abandoned 
the  practice  totally  and  forever.  Facts  might  be  pre- 
sented to  show  that  Mr.  Miller5  s  stern  regard  for  the 
principles  of  personal  virtue,  and  especially  his  abhor- 
rence of  the  slightest  violation  of  the  laws  of  chastity, 
exposed  him  to  the  raillery  of  his  less  scrupulous,  and 
even  shameless,  brother  officers.  It  is  sufficient  to  say, 
what  all  who  have  any  knowledge  of  the  question  will 
confirm,  that  his  personal  integrity  and  official  honor 
were  such,  throughout  his  connection  with  the  army,  as 
to  command,  in  an  almost  unexampled  degree,  the  re- 
spect and  affection  of  all  who  were  under  him  as  an 
officer,  and  the  hearty  confidence  and  esteem  of  his  offi- 
cial associates.  For  years  after  the  war  closed,  it  was  a 
common  thing  for  his  brethren  in  arms  to  turn  aside 
from  the  great  route  of  travel,  five  or  six  miles,  only  to 
enjoy  a  short  interview  with  one  to  whom  they  were  so 
strongly  attached ;  and  some  of  the  less  provident,  feel- 
ing sure  that  he  would  receive  them  with  a  sort  of  fath- 
erly sympathy,  which  a  poor,  unfortunate  soldier  seldom 
finds  in  the  world,  were  accustomed  to  tarry  with  him 
some  days  or  weeks  at  a  time. 

One  fact  must  be  mentioned,  which  will  speak  more 
than  volumes  in  behalf  of  his  commanding  integrity,  as 
it  shows  the  place  he  occupied  in  the  respect  and  confi- 
dence of  the  soldiers.  After  the  war,  two  members  of 
his  company,  who  lived  as  neighbors  in  the  extreme 
northern  part  of  Vermont,  had  some  business  difficulties, 
which  grew  to  be  so  serious  that  they  could  hardly  live 
together  as  neighbors  on  speaking  terms,  to  say  the 
least.  This  was  a  great  affliction  to  themselves,  as  brother 
soldiers,  to  their  families,  and  to  the  whole  neighborhood. 
These  men  had  often  thought  of  their  former  captain, 
though  they  were  much  older  than  he  was,  and  wished 


62  LIFE    OF    "WILLIAM    MILLER. 

the  difficulties  could  be  submitted  to  his  examination 
and  decision.  But  it  was  a  long  way  to  his  residence, 
and  the  time  and  cost  of  the  journey  seemed  too  much 
to  admit  of  such  an  arrangement.  However,  the  mat- 
ter became  a  source  of  so  much  trouble,  that  the  prop- 
osition was  made  by  one,  and  gladly  accepted  by  the 
other,  to  visit  Captain  Miller;  to  submit  the  case  to  him, 
by  telling  each  his  own  story,  and  to  abide  by  his  decis- 
ion. The  long  journey  was  performed  by  these  old 
soldiers  separately,  as  duellists  go  to  the  place  of  single 
combat.  They  arrived  at  Captain  Miller's  nearly  at  the 
same  time.  Arrangements  were  made  for  a  hearing. 
Each  told  his  story.  The  decision  was  made  known, 
after  all  the  facts  of  the  case  had  been  duly  considered. 
It  was  received  in  good  faith  by  the  parties.  They 
took  each  other  cordially  by  the  hand,  spent  a  little 
time  with  their  captain,  and  returned  to  their  homes  in 
company,  as  friends  and  brothers.  These  men,  now  far 
advanced  in  life,  it  is  believed  are  still  living.  Their 
names  could  be  given,  if  it  were  necessary. 

Paradoxical  as  it  may  appear,  some  of  the  most  dis- 
tinguished and  honorable  soldiers  have  been  the  most 
successful  bloodless  peace-makers,  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  some  of  the  most  contemptible  cowards,  with  peace- 
able pretensions  always  on  their  lips,  have  distinguished 
themselves  by  very  little  besides  their  successful  contriv- 
ances to  keep  all  engaged  in  war  with  whom  the}'  have 
had  to  do.  Without  claiming  any  special  distinction 
for  Mr.  Miller  on  the  score  of  what  are  styled  brilliant 
achievements  in  the  field  of  danger,  the  character  of  a 
great  lover  of  peace  belonged  to  him  as  a  distinguishing 
personal  trait.  He  delighted  in  peace,  naturally  :  it  is 
not  known  that  he  ever  intentionally  provoked  a  quar- 
rel; and  a  considerable  number  of  cases  could  be  cited, 
in  which  he  has  been  called  to  perform  the  office  of  a 
peace-maker,  and  in  the  duties  of  which  he  has  been 
remarkably  successful.  But  enough.  More  must  be 
left  unwritten  than  it  would  be  practicable  or  neces- 
sary to  write. 

The  watchful  Providence  which  guarded  him  in  the 
hour  of  deadly  peril;  the  long-suffering  which  spared 
him  while  neglecting  the  talents  bestowed,  or  misusing 


REMOVAL  TO  LOW  HAMPTON.  63 

them  in  rebellion  against  the  Giver ;  and  that  wisdom  and 
grace  which  overruled  all  the  dangers  experienced,  and  the 
derelictions  practised,  as  in  many  other  persons  of  distin- 
guished usefulness,  demand  our  hearty  adoration. 

The  close  of  Mr.  Miller's  military  life  was  to  be  the  com- 
mencement of  a  new  era  in  his  history.  The  circumstances 
which  preceded  that  change,  the  means  and  instrumentalities 
employed  in  its  accomplishment,  and  the  practical  results 
which  immediately  followed  in  the  circle  of  his  acquaintance, 
must  be  left  to  another  chapter. 


CHAPTER    IV. 

REMOVAL   TO   LOW  HAMPTON.  —  HIS   CONVERSION.  —  STUDY   OP 
THE   BIBLE. RULES    OF   INTERPRETATION,  ETC. 

On  the  retirement  of  Mr.  Miller  from  the  army,  he 
removed  his  family  from  Poultney,  Vt,  to  Low  Hampton, 
N.  Y.,  to  begin  there  the  occupation  of  farming.  His  father 
had  died  there,  in  the  year  1812,  leaving  the  homestead 
encumbered  with  a  mortgage.  That  was  cancelled  by  Mr. 
Miller,  who  permitted  his  mother  to  live  there,  with  his 
brother  Solomon,  while  he  purchased  for  himself  another 
farm,  in  the  neighborhood,  about  half  a  mile  to  the  west. 
This  lay  mostly  above  the  general  level  of  the  valley  of  the 
Poultney  river,  and  comprised  about  two  hundred  acres  of 
land,  with  a  surface  somewhat  uneven,  and  with  soil  similar 
to  that  usually  found  in  sections  geologically  marked  by 
black  slate  and  limestone.  Two  miles  to  the  east  was  the 
village  of  Fairhaven,  Vt.,  near  the  Poultney  river;  and 
eight  miles  to  the  west,  on  the  southern  extremity  of  Lake 
Champlain,  at  the  foot  of  bold,  precipitous  hills,  was  the  vil- 
lage of  Whitehall,  H.  Y. 

On  this  spot,  in  1815,  Mr.  Miller  erected  a  convenient 
farm-house,  similar  to  those  built  throughout  the  interior  of 
New  England  at  that  epoch.  It  was  of  wood,  two  stories 
high,  with  an  ell  projecting  in  the  rear.  The  front  and  ends 
were  painted  white,  with  green  blinds,  and  the  back  side  was 


64  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

red.  It  fronts  to  the  north.  A  small  yard,  enclosed  by  a 
picket  fence,  and  ornamented  by  lilacs,  raspberry  and  rose- 
bushes, separates  it  from  the  public  road  leading  to  Fair- 
haven,  which  is  one  of  the  interesting  objects  in  the  fore- 
ground of  the  extended  view  to  the  east,  as  seen  from  the 
window  of  the  -:  east  room/'  so  full  of  tender  and  holy  recol- 
lections to  all  visitors.* 

To  the  west  of  the  house,  a  few  rods  distant,  is  a  beautiful 
grove,  where,  in  later  times,  he  often  prayed  and  wept. 
This  spot  was  selected  by  the  political  party  to  which  Mr. 
Miller  belonged,  for  the  place  of  a  public- celebration  of  the 
national  independence,  on  its  anniversary,  July  4th,  1816. 
Mr.  Miller  was  selected  as  the  marshal  of  the  day ;  but,  not 
fancying  a  party  celebration,  he  used  his  influence  so  that  all 
persons,  irrespective  of  party,  were  invited  to  partake  of  its 
festivities.  In  those  days  of  party  excitement  this  was  con- 
sidered a  wonderful  stretch  of  charity. 

Mr.  Miller's  grandfather  Phelps  was  in  the  practice  of 
preaching  at  the  house  of  Mr.  M-'s  father,  when  he  made 
his  occasional  visits.  There  was  no  church  at  the  time  in 
that  section  of  the  town.  Through  his  labors  Mr.  Miller's 
mother  was  converted  ;  and  a  little  church  was  there  organ- 
ized, as  a  branch  of  the  Baptist  church  in  Orwell,  Vt. 

In  1812,  Elisha  Miller,  an  uncle  of  the  subject  of  this 
memoir,  was  settled  over  the  church  in  Low  Hampton,  and 
a  small  meeting-house  was  afterwards  erected.  On  Mr. 
Miller's  removal  to  Low  Hampton,  he  became  a  constant 
attendant,  except  in  the  absence  of  the  preacher,  at  that 
place  of  worship,  and  contributed  liberally  to  its  support. 
His  relation  to  the  pastor,  and  the  proximity  of  his  house, 
caused  it  to  become  the  head-quarters  of  the  denomination 
on  extra  as  well  as  on  ordinary  occasions.  There  the 
preachers  from  a  distance  found  food  and  shelter ;  and, 
though  fond  of  bantering  them  on  their  faith,  and  making 
their  opinions  a  subject  of  mirth  with  his  infidel  friends, 
they  always  found  a  home  beneath  his  roof. 

In  the  absence  of  the  pastor,  public  worship  was  con- 
ducted by  the  deacons,  who,  as  a  substitute  for  the  sermon, 
read  a  printed  discourse,  usually  from  "  Proudfoot's  Prac- 
tical Sermons."  Mr.  Miller's  mother  noticed  that,  on  such 
occasionSj  he  was  not  in  his  seat,  and  she  remonstrated  with 
*  See  page  2. 


THOUGHTS   OF  THE  FUTURE.  65 

him.  He  excused  his  absence  on  the  ground  that  he  was 
not  edified  by  the  manner  in  which  the  deacons  read ;  and 
intimated  that  if  he  could  do  the  reading,  he  should 
always  be  present.  This  being  suggested  to  those  grave 
officials,  they  were  pleased  with  the  idea ;  and,  after  that, 
they  selected  the  sermon  as  before,  but  Mr.  Miller  did  the 
reading,  although  still  entertaining  deistical  sentiments. 

The  time  had  now  come  when  God,  by  his  providence  and 
grace,  was  about  to  interpose  to  enlist  the  patriotic  soldier  in 
another  kind  of  warfare  ;  when  to  his  mind,  so  fond  of  those 
departments  of  truth  which  appealed  only  to  reason  and 
sense,  was  to  be  opened  a  more  inspiring  field ;  when  the 
persevering  and  delighted  student  of  history  was  to  see  and 
appreciate  the  connection  between  the  most  stirring  scenes 
and  mightiest  revolutions  in  this  world's  affairs  and  God's 
great  plan  of  redemption,  to  which  all  the  events  of  time  are 
made  subordinate. 

Detecting  himself  in  an  irreverent  use  of  the  name  of  God, 
as  before  related,  he  was  convicted  of  its  sinfulness,  and 
retired  to  his  beautiful  grove,  and  there,  in  meditation  on 
the  works  of  nature  and  Providence,  he  endeavored  to  pen- 
etrate the  mystery  of  the  connection  between  the  present 
and  a  future  state  of  existence. 

As  a  farmer,  he  had  had  more  leisure  for  reading ;  and 
he  was  at  an  age  when  the  future  of  man's  existence  will 
demand  a  portion  of  his  thoughts.  He  found  that  his  former 
views  gave  him  no  assurance  of  happiness  beyond  the 
present  life.  Beyond  the  grave,  all  was  dark  and  gloomy. 
To  use  his  own  words :  ' '  Annihilation  was  a  cold  and  chill- 
ing thought,  and  accountability  was  sure  destruction  to  all. 
The  heavens  were  as  brass  over  my  head,  and  the  earth  as 
iron  under  my  feet.  Eternity  I  —  what  was  it  ?  And 
death  — why  teas  it  ?  The  more  I  reasoned,  the  further  I 
was  from  demonstration.  The  more  I  thought,  the  more 
scattered  were  my  conclusions.  I  tried  to  stop  thinking,  but 
my  thoughts  would  not  be  controlled.  I  was  truly  wretched, 
but  did  not  understand  the  cause.  I  murmured  and  com- 
plained, but  knew  not  of  whom.  I  knew  that  there  was  a 
wrong,  but  knew  not  how  or  where  to  find  the  right.  I 
mourned,  but  without  hope." 

He  continued  in  this  state  of  mind  for  some  months, 


66  LIFE   OP  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

feeling' that  eternal  consequences  might  hang  on  the  nature 
and  object  of  his  belief. 

The  anniversary  of  the  battle  of  Plattsburg  —  September 
11  —  was  celebrated  in  all  that  region,  for  some  years,  with 
much  enthusiasm.  In  1816,  arrangements  had  been  made 
for  its  observance,  by  a  ball,  at  Fairhaven.  The  stirring 
scenes  of  the  late  campaign  being  thus  recalled,  Captain 
Miller  entered  into  the  preparations  for  the  expected  festivi- 
ties with  all  the  ardor  of  the  soldier.  In  the  midst  of  these, 
it  was  announced  that  Dr.  B.  would  preach  on  the  evening 
previous  to  the  ball.  In  the  general  gathering  to  that 
meeting,  Captain  Miller  and  his  help  attended,  more  from 
curiosity  than  from  other  actuating  cause. 

They  left  Captain  Miller's  house  in  high  glee.  The 
discourse  was  from  Zech.  2:  4  —  "Run!  speak  to  this 
young  man  " !  It  was  a  word  in  season.  On  their  return, 
Mrs.  M.,  who  had  remained  at  home,  observed  a  wonderful 
change  in  their  deportment.  Their  glee  was  gone,  and  all 
were  deeply  thoughtful,  and  not  disposed  to  converse,  in  reply 
to  her  questions  respecting  the  meeting,  the  ball,  &c.  They 
wrere  entirely  incapacitated  for  any  part  in  the  festive 
arrangements.  Other  managers  of  the  ball  wrere  equally 
unfitted  for  it ;  and  the  result  was  that  it  was  indefinitely 
postponed.  The  seriousness  extended  from  family  to  family, 
and  in  the  several  neighborhoods  in  that  vicinity  meetings 
for  prayer  and  praise  took  the  place  of  mirth  and  the  dance. 

On  the  Lord's  day  following,  it  devolved  on  Captain 
Miller,  as  usual  in  the  minister's  absence,  to  read  a  discourse 
of  the  deacons'  selection.  They  had  chosen  one  on  the 
" importance  of  Parental  Duties."  Soon  after  commencing, 
he  was  overpowered  by  the  inward  struggle  of  emotion,  with 
which  the  entire  congregation  deeply,  sympathized,  and  took 
his  seat.  His  deistical  principles  seemed  an  almost  insur- 
mountable difficulty  with  him.  Soon  after,  ''Suddenly," 
he  says,  u  the  character  of  a  Saviour  was  vividly  impressed 
upon  my  mind.  It  seemed  that  there  might  be  a  Being  so 
good  and  compassionate  as  to  himself  atone  for  our  trans- 
gressions, and  thereby  save  us  from  suffering  the  penalty 
of  sin.  I  immediately  felt  how  lovely  such  a  Being  must 
be ;  and  imagined  that  I  could  cast  myself  into  the  arms  of, 
aad  trust  in  the  mercy  of,  such  an  One.    But  the  question 


HIS   CONVERSION.  67 

arose,  How  can  it  be  proved  that  such  a  Being  does  exist  ?- 
Aside  from  the  Bible,  I  found  that  I  could  get  no  evidence 
of  the  existence  of  such  a  Saviour,  or  even  of  a  future  state. 
I  felt  that  to  believe  in  such  a  Saviour  without  evidence 
would  be  visionary  in  the  extreme.  I  saw  that  the  Bible 
did  bring  to  view  just  such  a  Saviour  as  I  needed ;  and  I 
was  perplexed  to  find  how  an  uninspired  book  should  develop 
principles  so  perfectly  adapted  to  the  wants  of  a  fallen  world. 
I  was  constrained  to  admit  that  the  Scriptures  must  be  a 
revelation  from  God.  They  became  my  delight;  and  in 
Jesus  I  found  a  friend.  The  Saviour  became  to  me  the 
chiefest  among  ten  thousand;  and  the  Scriptures,  which 
before  were  dark  and  contradictory,  now  became  the  lamp  to 
my  feet  and  light  to  my  path.  My  mind  became  settled 
and  satisfied.  I  found  the  Lord  God  to  be  a  Rock  in  the 
midst  of  the  ocean  of  life.  The  Bible  now  became  my 
chief  study,  and  I  can  truly  say,  I  searched  it  with  great 
delight.  I  found  the  half  was  never  told  me.  I  wondered 
why  I  had  not  seen  its  beauty  and  glory  before,  and  mar- 
velled that  I  could  have  ever  rejected  it.  I  found  everything 
revealed  that  my  heart  could  desire,  and  a  remedy  for  every 
disease  of  the  soul.  I  lost  all  taste  for  other  reading,  and 
applied  my  heart  to  get  wisdom  from  God." 

Mr.  Miller  immediately  erected  the  family  altar;  publicly 
professed  his  faith  in  that  religion  which  had  been  food  for 
his  mirth,  by  connecting  himself  with  the  little  church  that 
he  had  despised  ;  opened  his  house  for  meetings  of  prayer  ; 
and  became  an  ornament  and  pillar  in  the  church,  and  an 
aid  to  both  pastor  and  people.  The  die  was  cast,  and  he 
had  taken  his  stand  for  life  as  a  soldier  of  the  cross,  as  all 
who  knew  him  felt  assured ;  and  henceforth  the  badge  of 
discipleship,  in  the  church  or  world,  in  his  family  or  closet, 
indicated  whose  he  was  and  whom  he  served. 

His  pious  relations  had  witnessed  with  pain  his  former 
irreligious  opinions :  how  great  were  their  rejoicings  now ! 
The  church,  favored  with  his  liberality,  and  edified  by  his 
reading,  but  pained  by  his  attacks  on  their  faith,  could  now 
rejoice  with  the  rejoicing.  His  infidel  friends  regarded  his 
departure  from  them  as  the  loss  of  a  standard-bearer.  And 
the  new  convert  felt  that  henceforth,  wherever  he  was,  he 
must  deport  himself  as  a  Christian,  and  perform  his  whole 
7 


68  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

duty.  His  subsequent  history  must  show  how  well  this  was 
done. 

To  the  church,  his  devotion  of  himself  to  his  Master's 
service  was  as  welcome  as  his  labors  were  efficient.  The 
opposite  party,  especially  the  more  gifted  of  them,  regarded 
him  as  a  powerful,  and,  therefore,  a  desirable,  antagonist. 
He  knew  the  strength  of  both  parties.  That  of  the  former 
he  had  often  tested,  when,  in  his  attacks,  though  they  might 
have  been  silenced,  he  had  felt  that  he  had  a  bad  cause ;  and 
the  weakness  of  the  latter  had  been  forcibly  impressed  on 
him  in  his  fruitless  efforts  to  assure  himself  that  they  were 
right.  He  knew  all  their  weak  points,  and  where  their 
weapons  could  be  turned  against  them.  They  were  not  dis- 
posed to  yield  the  ground  without  a  struggle,  and  began 
their  attack  on  him  by  using  the  weapons  and  assailing  the 
points  which  characterized  his  own  former  attacks  on  Chris- 
tianity ;  and  to  this  fact,  under  God,  is  probably  owing  his 
subsequent  world-wide  notoriety. 

He  had  taunted  his  friends  with  entertaining  c:a  blind 
faith "  in  the  Bible,  containing,  as  it  did,  many  things  which 
they  confessed  their  inability  to  explain.  He  had  enjoyed 
putting  perplexing  questions  to  clergymen  and  others,  — 
triumphing  in  their  unsatisfactory  replies.  These  questions 
had  not  been  forgotten;  and  his  Christian  friends,  also, 
turned  his  former  taunts  upon  himself. 

Soon  after  his  renunciation  of  Deism,  in  conversing  with 
a  friend  respecting  the  hope  of  a  glorious  eternity  through 
the  merits  and  intercessions  of  Christ,  he  was  asked  how  he 
knew  there  was  such  a  Saviour.  He  replied,  "  It  is  revealed 
in  the  Bible." —  "How  do  you  know  the  Bible  is  true?" 
was  the  response,  with  a  reiteration  of  his  former  arguments 
on  the  contradictions  and  mysticisms  in  which  he  had  claimed 
it  was  shrouded. 

Mr.  Miller  felt  such  taunts  in  their  full  force.  He  was 
at  first  perplexed ;  but,  on  reflection,  he  considered  that  if 
the  Bible  is  a  revelation  of  God,  it  must  be  consistent  with 
itself;  all  its  parts  must  harmonize,  must  have  been  given 
for  man's  instruction,  and,  consequently,  must  be  adapted  to 
his  understanding.  He,  therefore,  said,  "  Give  me  time,  and 
I  will  harmonize  all  those  apparent  contradictions  to  my  own 
satisfaction,  or  I  will  be  a  Deist  still." 


STUDY    OF   THE   BIBLE.  69 

He  then  devoted  himself  to  the  prayerful  reading  of  the 
Word.  He  laid  aside  all  commentaries,  and  used  the  margi- 
nal references  and  his  Concordance  as  his  only  helps.  He 
saw  that  he  must  distinguish  between  the  Bible  and  all  the 
peculiar  and  partisan  interpretations  of  it.  The  Bible  was 
older  than  them  all,  must  be  above  them  all ;  and  he  placed 
it  there.  He  saw  that  it  must  correct  all  interpretations ; 
and,  in  correcting  them,  its  own  pure  light  w^ould  shine  with- 
out the  mists  which  traditionary  belief  had  involved  it  in. 
He  resolved  to  lay  aside  all  preconceived  opinions,  and  to 
receive,  with  child-like  simplicity,  the  natural  and  obvious 
meaning  of  Scripture.  He  pursued  the  study  of  the  Bible 
with  the  most  intense  interest, —  whole  nights,  as  well  as 
days,  being  devoted  to  that  object.  At  times  delighted  with 
truth,  w7hich  shone  forth  from  the  sacred  volume,  making 
clear  to  his  understanding  the  great  plan  of  God  for  the 
redemption  of  fallen  man ;  and  at  times  puzzled  and  almost 
distracted  by  seemingly  inexplicable  or  contradictory  pas- 
sages, he  persevered,  until  the  application  of  his  great  prin- 
ciple of  interpretation  was  triumphant.  He  became  puzzled 
only  to  be  delighted,  and  delighted  only  to  persevere  the 
more  in  penetrating  its  beauties  and  mysteries. 

His  manner  of  studying  the  Bible  is  thus  described  by 
himself : 

"I  determined  to  lay  aside  all  my  prepossessions,  to 
thoroughly  compare  Scripture  w7ith  Scripture,  and  to  pursue 
its  study  in  a  regular  and  methodical  manner.  I  commenced 
with  Genesis,  and  read  verse  by  verse,  proceeding  no  faster 
than  the  meaning  of  the  several  passages  should  be  so  un- 
folded as  to  leave  me  free  from  embarrassment  respecting 
any  mysticisms  or  contradictions.  Whenever  I  found  any- 
thing obscure,  my  practice  was  to  compare  it  with  all  col- 
lateral passages ;  and,  by  the  help  of  Cruden,  I  examined 
all  the  texts  of  Scripture  in  which  were  found  any  of  the 
prominent  words  contained  in  any  obscure  portion.  Then, 
by  letting  every  word  have  its  proper  bearing  on  the  subject 
of  the  text,  if  my  view  of  it  harmonized  with  every  collateral 
passage  in  the  Bible,  it  ceased  to  be  a  difficulty.  In  this  way 
I  pursued  the  study  of  the  Bible,  in  my  first  perusal  of  it, 
for  about  two  years,  and  was  fully  satisfied  that  it  is  its  own 
interpreter.     I  found  that,  by  a  comparison  of  Scripture 


70  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

with  history,  all  the  prophecies,  as  far  as  they  have  been 
fulfilled,  had  been  fulfilled  literally;  that  all  the  various 
figures,  metaphors,  parables,  similitudes,  &c.,  of  the  Bible, 
were  either  explained  in  their  immediate  connection,  or  the 
terms  in  which  they  were  expressed  were  defined  in  other 
portions  of  the  word ;  and,  when  thus  explained,  are  to  be 
literally  understood  in  accordance  with  such  explanation.  I 
was  thus  satisfied  that  the  Bible  is  a  system  of  revealed 
truths,  so  clearly  and  simply  given  that  the  *  wayfaring  man, 
though  a  fool,  need  not  err  therein.'  '' 

In  thus  continuing  the  study,  he  adopted  the  following 

RULES   OF   INTERPRETATION. 

I.  Every  word  must  have  its  proper  bearing  on  the  sub- 
ject presented  in  the  Bible.     Proof,  Matt.  5 :  18. 

II.  All  Scripture  is  necessary,  and  may  be  understood  by 
a  diligent  application  and  study.    Proof.  2  Tim.  3  :  15 — 17. 

III.  Nothing  revealed  in  Scriptures  can  or  will  be  hid 
from  those  who  ask  in  faith,  not  wavering.  Proof  Deut. 
29  :  29.  Matt.  10  :  26.  27.  1  Cor.  2:10.  Phil.  3  :  15  ; 
Isa.  45:  11.  Matt.  21:  22.  John  14 :  13,  14;  15:  7; 
James  1  :  5,  6.     1  John  5 :  13 — 15. 

IV.  To  understand  doctrine,  bring  all  the  Scriptures  to- 
gether on  the  subject  you  wish  to  know ;  then  let  every  word 
have  its  proper  influence ;  and  if  you  can  form  your  theory 
without  a  contradiction,  you  cannot  be  in  error.  Proof 
Isa.  28  :  7—29 :  35  :  8.  Prov.  19  :  27.  Luke  24  :  27, 
44,  45.    Rom.  16  :  26.    James  5  :  19.    2  Pet.  1 :  19,  20. 

V.  Scripture  must  be  its  own  expositor,  since  it  is  a  rule 
of  itself.  If  I  depend  on  a  teacher  to  expound  to  me,  and 
he  should  guess  at  its  meaning,  or  desire  to  have  it  so  on 
account  of  his  sectarian  creed,  or  to  be  thought  wise,  then 
his  guessing,  desire,  creed  or  wisdom,  is  my  rule,  and  not 
the  Bible.  Proof  Ps.  19  :  7—11 ;  119  :  97—105.  Mat. 
23  ■  8—10.  1  Cor.  2 :  12—16.  Ezk.  34 :  18,  19.  Luke 
11  :  52.     Matt.  2  :  7,  8. 

VI.  God  has  revealed  things  to  come,  by  visions,  in 
figures  and  parables ;  and  in  this  way  the  same  things  are 
oftentime  revealed  again  and  again,  by  different  visions,  or  in 
different  figures  and  parables.     If  you  wish  to  understand 


HULES   OF  INTERPRETATION.  71 

them,  you  must  combine  them  all  in  one.  Proof,  Ps.  89  : 
19.  Hos.  12  :  10.  Hab.  2  :  2.  Acts  2  :  17.  1  Cor. 
10  :  6.  Heb.  9  :  9,  24.  Ps.  78  :  2.  Matt.  13  :  13.  34. 
Gen.  41 :  1—32.     Dan.  2d,  7th  &  8th.     Acts  10  :  9—16. 

VII.  Visions  are  always  mentioned  as  such.    2  Cor.  12: 1. 

VIII.  Figures  always  have  a  figurative  meaning,  and 
are  used  much  in  prophecy  to  represent  future  things,  times 
and  events, —  such  as  mountains,  meaning  governments, 
Dan.  2  :  35,  44 ;  beasts,  meaning  kingdoms,  Dan.  7  :  8,17; 
waters,  meaning  people,  Kev.  17  :  1,  15 ;  day,  meaning 
year,  &c.     Ezk.  4:6. 

IX.  Parables  are  used  as  comparisons  to  illustrate  sub- 
jects, and  must  be  explained  in  the  same  way  as  figures,  by 
the  subject  and  Bible.     Mark  4  :  13. 

X.  Figures  sometimes  have  two  or  more  different  signifi- 
cations, as  day  is  used  in  a  figurative  sense  to  represent 
three  different  periods  of  time,  namely,  first,  indefinite, 
Eccles.  7 :  14 ;  second,  definite,  a  day  for  a  year,  Ezk.  4:6; 
and  third,  a  day  for  a  thousand  yearsx  2  Pet.  3 :  8. 

The  right  construction  will  harmonize  with  the  Bible,  and 
make  good  sense  ;  other  constructions  will  not. 

XI.  If  a  word  makes  good  sense  as  it  stands,  and  does  no 
violence  to  the  simple  laws  of  nature,  it  is  to  be  understood 
literally;  if  not,  figuratively.     Rev.  12  :  1,  2  ;  17:  3—7. 

XII.  To  learn  the  meaning  of  a  figure,  trace  the  word 
through  your  Bible,  and  when  you  find  it  explained,  substi- 
tute the  explanation  for  the  word  used ;  and,  if  it  make  good 
sense,  you  need  not  look  further ;  if  not,  look  again. 

XIII.  To  know  whether  we  have  the  true  historical 
event  for  the  fulfilment  of  a  prophecy  :  If  you  find  every 
word  of  the  prophecy  (after  the  figures  are  understood)  is 
literally  fulfilled,  then  you  may  know  that  your  history  is 
the  true  event ;  but  if  one  word  lacks  a  fulfilment,  then  you 
must  look  for  another  event,  or  w^ait  its  future  development ; 
for  God  takes  care  that  history  and  prophecy  shall  agree, 
so  that  the  true  believing  children  of  God  may  never  be 
ashamed.  Ps.  22  :  5.  Isa.  45  :  17—19.  1  Pet.  2  :  6. 
Rev.  17  :  17.     Acts  3  :  18. 

XIV.  The  most  important  rule  of  all  is,  that  you  must 
have  faith.  It  must  be  a  faith  that  requires  a  sacrifice,  and, 
if  tried,  would  give  up  the  dearest  object  on  earth,  the  world 

7* 


72  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

and  all  its  desires, —  character,  living,  occupation,  friends, 
home,  comforts  and  worldly  honors.  If  any  of  these  should 
hinder  our  believing  any  part  of  God's  word,  it  would  show 
our  faith  to  be  vain.  Nor  can  we  ever  believe  so  long  as 
one  of  these  motives  lies  lurking  in  our  hearts.  We  must 
believe  that  God  will  never  forfeit  his  word;  and  we  can 
have  confidence  that  He  who  takes  notice  of  the  sparrow's 
fall,  and  numbers  the  hairs  of  our  head,  will  guard  the  trans- 
lation of  his  own  word,  and  throw  a  barrier  around  it,  and 
prevent  those  who  sincerely  trust  in  God,  and  put  implicit 
confidence  in  his  word,  from  erring  far  from  the  truth." 

"  While  thus  studying  the  Scriptures," — continuing  the 
words  of  his  own  narrative, — "I  became  satisfied,  if  the 
prophecies  which  have  been  fulfilled  in  the  past  are  any  cri- 
terion by  which  to  judge  of  the  manner  of  the  fulfilment  of 
those  which  are  future,  that  the  popular  views  of  the  spirit- 
ual reign  of  Christ  —  a  temporal  millennium  before  the  end 
of  the  world,  and  the  Jews'  return  —  are  not  sustained  by 
the  word  of  God;  for  I  found  that  all  the  Scriptures  on 
which  those  favorite  theories  are  based  are  as  clearly  ex- 
pressed as  are  those  that  were  literally  fulfilled  at  the  first 
advent,  or  at  any  other  period  in  the  past.  I  found  it 
plainly  taught  in  the  Scriptures  that  Jesus  Christ  will  again 
descend  to  this  earth,  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  in  all 
the  glory  of  his  Father :  *  that,  at  his  coming,  the  kingdom 
and  dominion  under  the  whole  heaven  will  be  given  to  Him 
and  the  saints  of  the  Most  High,  who  will  possess  it  forever, 
even  for  ever  and  ever :  f  that,  as  the  old  world  perished  by 
the  deluge,  so  the  earth,  that  now  is,  is  reserved  unto  fire,  to 
be  melted  with  fervent  heat  at  Christ's  coming ;  after  which, 
according  to  the  promise,  it  is  to  become  the  new  earth, 
wherein  the  righteous  will  forever  dwell :  |  that,  at  his  com- 
ing, the  bodies  of  all  the  righteous  dead  will  be  raised,  and 
all  the  righteous  living  be  changed  from  a  corruptible  to  an 
incorruptible,  from  a  mortal  to  an  immortal  state ;  that  they 
will  all  be  caught  up  together  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air, 

*  See  John  14  :  3  ;  Acts  1 :  11  ;  1  Thess. VTlfT ;  Rev.  1:7;  Matt  16  : 
27  ;  24  :  30  ;  Mark  8 :  38  ;  13  :  26;  Dan.  7  :  13. 

t  Dan.  7  :  14,  18,  22,  27  ;  Matt.  25  :  34  ;  Luke  12  :  32  ;  19  :  12,  15 ; 
22 :  29  ;  1  Cor.  9  :  25  ;  2  Tim.  4:1,8;  James  1  :  12  ;  1  Pet.  5  :  4. 

%  2  Pet  3  :  7—10  ;  Isa.  65 :  17—19  ;  Rev.  21  :  22. 


THE  TEACHINGS  OF  PROPHECY.  73 

and  will  reign  with  him  forever  in  the  regenerated  earth :  * 
that  the  controversy  with  Zion  will  then  be  finished,  her 
children  be  delivered  from  bondage,  and  from  the  power  of 
the  tempter,  and  the  saints  be  all  presented  to  God  blame- 
less, without  spot  or  wrinkle  in  love ;  f  that  the  bodies  of  the 
wicked  will  then  all  be  destroyed,  and  their  spirits  be  re- 
served in  prison  until  their  resurrection  and  damnation; % 
and  that,  when  the  earth  is  thus  regenerated,  the  righteous 
raised,  and  the  wicked  destroyed,  the  kingdom  of  God  will 
have  come,  when  his  will  will  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  done 
in  heaven ;  that  the  meek  will  inherit  it,  and  the  kingdom 
become  the  saints.§  I  found  that  the  only  millennium  taught 
in  the  word  of  God  is  the  thousand  years  which  are  to  inter- 
vene between  the  first  resurrection  and  that  of  the  rest  of 
the  dead,  as  inculcated  in  the  twentieth  of  Revelation :  and 
that  it  must  necessarily  follow  the  personal  coming  of  Christ 
and  the  regeneration  of  the  earth :  ||  that,  till  Christ's  com- 
ing, and  the  end  of  the  world,  the  righteous  and  wicked  are 
to  continue  together  on  the  earth,  and  that  the  horn  of 
the  Papacy  is  to  war  against  the  saints  until  his  appearing 
and  kingdom,  when  it  will  be  destroyed  by  the  brightness  of 
Christ's  coming ;  so  that  there  can  be  no  conversion  of  the 
world  before  the  advent  ;1f  and  that  as  the  new  earth,  wherein 
dwelleth  righteousness,  is  located  by  Peter  after  the  confla- 
gration, and  is  declared  by  him  to  be  the  same  for  which  we 
look,  according  to  the  promise  of  Isa.  65 :  17,  and  is  the 
same  that  John  saw  in  vision  after  the  passing  away  of  the 
former  heavens  and  earth ;  it  must  necessarily  follow  that 
the  various  portions  of  Scripture  that  refer  to  the  millennial 
state  must  have  their  fulfilment  after  the  resurrection  of  all 

*  1  Cor.  15  :  20,  23,  49,  51—53  ;  Phil;  3  :  20,  21 ;  1  Thess.  4  :  14—17; 

1  John  3  :  2. 

t  Isa.  34  :  8  ;  40  :  2,  5  ;  41  :  10—12  ;  Eom.  8  :  21—23  ;  1  Cor.  1  :  7, 
8  ;  4  :  14  ;  15  :54,  56  ;  Eph.  5  :  27  ;  Col.  1  :  22  ;  1  Thess.  3 :  13  ;  Heb. 

2  :  13—15  ;  Jude  24  ;  Rev.  20  :  1—6. 

t  Psa.  1:3;  97  :  3  ;  Isa.  60  :  15,  16  ;  24  :  21,  22  ;  Dan.  7  :  10  ;  Mai. 
4:1;  Matt.  3:12;  John  25  :  29  ;  Acts  24 :  15  ;  1  Cor.  3  :  13  ;  1  Thess. 
5 :  2,  3  ;  2  Thess.  1  :  7—9  ;  1  Pet.  1  :  7  ;  2  Pet.  3  :  7,  10  ;  Jude  6,  7, 
14,  15  ;  Rev.  20  :  3,  13—15. 

§  Psa.  37  :  9—11,  22,  28,  29,  34  ;  Prov.  2  :  21,  22  ;  10  :  30  ;  Isa  40  : 
21  ;  Matt.  5 :  5  ;  6  :  10. 

II  Rev.  20  :  2—7. 

IT  Matt.  13  :  37—43  ;  24  :  14  ;  Dan.  7  :  21,  22  ;  2  Thess.  2  :  8. 


74  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

the  samts  that  sleep  in  Jesus.  *  I  also  found  that  the 
promises  respecting  Israel's  restoration  are  applied  by  the 
apostle  to  all  who  are  Christ's, —  the  putting  on  of  Christ 
constituting  them  Abraham's  seed,  and  heirs  according  to  the 
promise.f 

"I  was  then  satisfied,  as  I  saw  conclusive  evidence  to 
prove  the  advent  personal  and  pre-millennial,  that  all  the 
events  for  which  the  church  look  to  be  fulfilled  [in  the  mil- 
lennium] before  the  advent,  must  be  subsequent  to  it ;  and 
that,  unless  there  were  other  unfulfilled  prophecies,  the 
advent  of  the  Lord,  instead  of  being  looked  for  only  in  the 
distant  future,  might  be  a  continually- expected  event.  In 
examining  the  prophecies  on  that  point,  I  found  that  only 
four  universal  monarchies  are  anywhere  predicted,  in  the 
Bible,  to  precede  the  setting  up  of  God's  everlasting  king- 
dom ;  that  three  of  those  had  passed  away, — Babylon,  Medo- 
Persia,  and  Grecia, —  and  that  the  fourth  —  Rome  —  had 
already  passed  into  its  last  state,  the  state  in  which  it  is  to 
be  when  the  stone  cut  out  of  the  mountain  without  hands 
shall  smite  the  image  on  the  feet,  and  break  to  pieces  all 
the  kingdoms  of  this  world.  I  was  unable  to  find  any  pre- 
diction of  events  which  presented  any  clear  evidence  of  their 
fulfilment  before  the  scenes  that  usher  in  the  advent.  And 
finding  all  the  signs  of  the  times,  and  the  present  condition 
of  the  world,  to  compare  harmoniously  with  the  prophetic 
descriptions  of  the  last  days,  I  was  compelled  to  believe  that 
this  world  had  about  reached  the  limits  of  the  period  allotted 
for  its  continuance.  As  I  regarded  the  evidence,  I  could 
arrive  at  no  other  conclusion. 

"  Another  kind  of  evidence  that  vitally  affected  my  mind 
was  the  chronology  of  the  Scriptures.  I  found,  on  pursuing 
the  study  of  the  Bible,  various  chronological  periods  extend- 
ing, according  to  my  understanding  of  them,  to  the  coming 
of  the  Saviour.  I  found  that  predicted  events,  which  had 
been  fulfilled  in  the  past,  often  occurred  within  a  given  time. 
The  one  hundred  and  twenty  years  to  the  flood,  Gen.  6:3; 
the  seven  days  that  were  to  precede  it,  with  forty  days  of 
predicted  rain,  Gen.  7:4;  the  four  hundred  years  of  the 

*2  Pet.  3  ;  Isa.  65  :  17  ;  Rev.  21  ;  22. 

t  Rom.  2 :  14, 15  ;  4  :  13  ;  9  :  6  ;  10  :  12  ;  11  :  17  ;  Gal.  3  :  29  ;  Eph. 
2 :  14,  15. 


THE  TEACHINGS  OF  PROPHECY.  75 

sojourn  of  Abraham's  seed,  Gen.  15:13;  the  three  days  of 
the  butler's  and  baker's  dreams,  Gen.  40  :  12 — 20 ;  the 
seven  years  of  Pharaoh's,  Gen.  41 :  28 — 54  ;  the  forty  years 
in  the  wilderness,  Num.  14 :  34 ;  the  three  and  a  half  years 
of  famine,  1  Kings  17:1;  the  sixty-five  years  to  the  break- 
ing of  Ephraim,  Isa.  7:8;  the  seventy  years'  captivity,  Jer. 
25  :  11 ;  Nebuchadnezzar's  seven  times,  Dan.  4  :  13 — 16  ; 
and  the  seven  weeks,  threescore  and  two  weeks,  and  the  one 
wTeek,  making  seventy  weeks,  determined  upon  the  Jews, 
Dan.  9  :  24 — 27 ;  the  events  limited  by  these  times  were  all 
once  only  a  matter  of  prophecy,  and  were  fulfilled  in  accord- 
ance with  the  predictions. 

11  When,  therefore,  I  found  the  2300  prophetic  days,  which 
were  to  mark  the  length  of  the  vision  from  the  Persian  to 
the  end  of  the  fourth  kingdom,  the  seven  times'  continuance 
of  the  dispersion  of  God's  people,  and  the  1335  prophetic 
days  to  the  standing  of  Daniel  in  his  lot,  all  evidently  extend- 
ing to  the  advent,  with  other  prophetical  periods,  I  could 
but  regard  them  as  '  the  times  before  appointed,'  which  God 
had  revealed  'unto  his  servants  the  prophets.'  As  I  was 
fully  convinced  that  c  all  Scripture  given  by  inspiration  of 
God  is  profitable,' — that  it  came  not  at  any  time  by  the  will 
of  man,  but  was  written  as  holy  men  were  moved  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  was  written  for  our  learning,  that  wTe, 
through  patience  and  comfort  of  the  Scriptures,  might  have 
hope, —  I  could  but  regard  the  chronological  portions  of  the 
Bible  as  being  as  much  a  portion  of  the  word  of  God,  and 
as  much  entitled  to  our  serious  consideration,  as  any  other 
portion  of  the  Scriptures. 

"  I,  therefore,  felt  that,  in  endeavoring  to  comprehend 
what  God  had  in  his  mercy  seen  fit  to  reveal  to  us,  I  had  no 
right  to  pass  over  the  prophetic  periods.  I  saw  that,  as  the 
events  predicted  to  be  fulfilled  in  prophetic  days  had  been 
extended  over  about  as  many  literal  years  ;  as  God,  in  Num. 
14 :  34,  and  Ezek.  4 :  4 — 6,  had  appointed  each  day  for  a 
year ;  as  the  seventy  weeks  to  the  Messiah  wrere  fulfilled  in 
490  years,  and  the  1260  prophetic  days  of  the  Papal  su- 
premacy in  1260  years;  and  as  these  prophetical  days 
extending  to  the  advent  were  given  in  connection  with  sym- 
bolic prophecy,  I  could  only  regard  the  time  as  symbolical, 
and  as  standing  each  day  for  a  year,  in  accordance  with  the 


76  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

opinions  of  all  the  standard  Protestant  commentators.  If, 
then,  we  could  obtain  any  clue  to  the  time  of  their  com- 
mencement, I  conceived  we  should  be  guided  to  the  probable 
time  of  their  termination :  and,  as  God  would  not  bestow  upon 
us  an  useless  revelation,  I  regarded  them  as  conducting  us 
to  the  time  when  we  might  confidently  look  for  the  coming 
of  the  Chiefest  of  ten  thousand,  One  altogether  lovely. 

"  From  a  further  study  of  the  Scriptures,  I  concluded 
that  the  seven  times  of  Gentile  supremacy  must  commence 
when  the  Jews  ceased  to  be  an  independent  nation,  at  the 
captivity  of  Manasseh,  which  the  best  chronologers  assigned 
to  b.  c.  677;  that  the  2300  days  commenced  with  the  sev- 
enty weeks,  which  the  best  chronologers  dated  from  b.  c.457; 
and  that  the  1335  days,  commencing  with  the  taking  away 
of  the  daily,  and  the  setting  up  of  the  abomination  that 
maketh  desolate,  Dan.  12:  11,  were  to  be  dated  from  the 
setting  up  of  the  Papal  supremacy,  after  the  taking  away  of 
Pagan  abominations,  and  which,  according  to  the  best  his- 
torians I  could  consult,  should  be  dated  from  about  A.  D.  508. 
Reckoning  all  these  prophetic  periods  from  the  several  dates 
assigned  by  the  best  chronologers  for  the  events  from  which 
they  should  evidently  be  reckoned,  they  would  all  terminate 
together,  about  a.  d.  1843.  I  was  thus  brought,  in  1818, 
at  the  close  of  my  two  years'  study  of  the  Scriptures,  to  the 
solemn  conclusion,  that  in  about  twenty-five  years  from  that 
time  all  the  affairs  of  our  present  state  would  be  wound  up ; 
that  all  its  pride  and  power,  pomp  and  vanity,  wickedness 
and  oppression,  would  come  to  an  end ;  and  that,  in  the  place 
of  the  kingdoms  of  this  world,  the  peaceful  and  long-desired 
kingdom  of  the  Messiah  would  be  established  under  the  whole 
heaven ;  that,  in  about  twenty-five  years,  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  would  be  revealed,  and  all  flesh  see  it  together, —  the 
desert  bud  and  blossom  as  the  rose,  the  fir-tree  come  up 
instead  of  the  thorn,  and  instead  of  the  briar  the  myrtle-tree, 
—  the  curse  be  removed  from  off  the  earth,  death  be  de- 
stroyed, reward  be  given  to  the  servants  of  God,  the  proph- 
ets and  saints,  and  them  who  fear  his  name,  and  those  be 
destroyed  that  destroy  the  earth. 

"  I  need  not  speak  of  the  joy  that  filled  my  heart  in  view 
of  the  delightful  prospect,  nor  of  the  ardent  longings  of  my 
soul  for  a  participation  in  the  joys  of  the  redeemed.     The 


HIS  CREED.  77 

Bible  was  now  to  me  a  new  book.  It  was  indeed  a  feast  of 
reason :  all  that  was  dark,  mystical  or  obscure,  to  me,  in  its 
teachings,  had  been  dissipated  from  my  mind  before  the  clear 
light  that  now  dawned  from  its  sacred  pages ;  and  0,  how 
bright  and  glorious  the  truth  appeared !  All  the  contra- 
dictions and  inconsistencies  I  had  before  found  in  the  Word 
were  gone ;  and,  although  there  were  many  portions  of  which 
I  was  not  satisfied  I  had  a  full  understanding,  yet  so  much 
light  had  emanated  from  it  to  the  illumination  of  my  before 
darkened  mind,  that  I  felt  a  delight  in  studying  the  Scrip- 
tures which  I  had  not  before  supposed  could  be  derived  from 
its  teachings.  I  commenced  their  study  with  no  expectation 
of  finding  the  time  of  the  Saviour's  coming,  and  I  could  at 
first  hardly  believe  the  result  to  which  I  had  arrived  ;  but 
the  evidence  struck  me  with  such  force  that  I  could  not 
resist  my  convictions.  I  became  nearly  settled  in  my  con- 
clusions, and  began  to  wait,  and  watch,  and  pray  for  my 
Saviour's  coming." 

The  above  are  the  conclusions  to  which  he  arrived  on  the 
general  subject  of  prophecy  ;  but  his  views  on  other  scriptu- 
ral topics  may  not  be  uninteresting  in  this  connection.  His 
general  theological  opinions  may  be  inferred  from  his  con- 
necting himself  with  a  Calvinistic  Baptist  church,  as  the  one 
most  congenial  to  his  faith.  But  he  has  left,  among  his 
papers,  an  unfinished  compendium  of  his  belief,  which  bears 
date,  and  is  appended  to  the  annexed  certificate,  as  follows : 

"  Low  Hampton,  Sept.  5,  1822. 
"  I  hereby  acknowledge  that  I  have  long  believed  it  my 
duty  ...  to  leave,  for  the  inspection  of  my  brethren, 
friends  and  children,  a  brief  statement  of  my  faith  (and 
which  ought  to  be  my  practice) ;  and  I  pray  God  to  forgive 
me  where  I  go  astray.  I  made  it  a  subject  of  prayer  and 
meditation,  and,  therefore,  leave  the  following  as  my  faith, 
—  reserving  the  privilege  of  correction. 

(Signed,)  Wm.  Miller. 

"  Art.  I.  I  believe  the  Bible  is  given  by  God  to  man,  as 
a  rule  for  our  practice,  and  a  guide  to  our  faith,  —  that  it 
is  a  revelation  of  God  to  man." 

"  Art.  II.    I  believe  in  one  living  and  true  God,  and  that 


78  LIFE   OP  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

theie  are  three  persons  in  the  Godhead, — as  there  is  in 
man,  the  body,  soul  and  spirit.  And  if  any  one  will  tell  me 
how  these  exist,  I  will  tell  him  how  the  three  persons  of  the 
Triune  God  are  connected." 

w  Art.  III.  I  believe  that  God,  by  his  Son,  created  man 
in  the  image  of  the  Triune  God,  with  a  body,  soul  and  spirit ; 
and  that  he  was  created  a  moral  agent,  capable  of  living,  of 
obeying,  or  transgressing  the  laws  of  his  Maker." 

"Art.  IV.  I  believe  that  man,  being  tempted  by  the 
enemy  of  all  good,  did  transgress  and  became  polluted; 
from  which  act,  sin  entered  into  the  world,  and  all  mankind 
became  naturally  sinners,  thrust  out  from  the  presence  of 
God,  and  exposed  to  his  just  wrath  forever." 

"  Art.  V.  I  believe  that  God,  knowing  from  eternitv  the 
use  that  man  would  make  of  his  [free]  agency,  did,  in  his 
council  of  eternity,  ordain  that  his  Son  should  die ;  and  that 
through  his  death  salvation  should  be  given  to  fallen  man, 
through  such  means  as  God  should  appoint." 

"Art.  VI.  I  believe  that,  through  the  agency  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  sinners  are  made  the  recipients  of  mercy,  in 
conformity  to  the  Divine  plan,  founded  on  the  wisdom  and 
knowledge  of  God  ;  the  fruits  of  which  are  manifested  in  the 
recipient  by  works  of  repentance  and  faith  ;  and  without 
which  no  man,  coming  to  years  of  discretion  and  able  to 
choose  between  good  and  evil,  can  have  an  interest  in  the 
blood  and  righteousness  of  Christ." 

"  Art.  VII.  I  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  is  an  offering  of 
God  to  sinners  for  their  redemption  from  sin,  and  that  those 
who  believe  in  his  name  may  take  him  by  faith,  go  to  God, 
and  find  mercy;  and  that  such  will  in  no  wise  be  rejected." 

"Art.  VIII.  I  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  was  the  sacri- 
fice for  sin  which  justice  demanded  ;  and  that  all  those  who 
confess  their  sins  on  the  head  of  this  victim,  may  expect  for- 
giveness of  sin  through  the  blood  of  the  atonement,  which 
is  in  Jesus  Christ,  the  great  High  Priest  in  the  Holy  of 
Holies." 

"Art.  IX.  I  believe  the  atonement  to  be  made  by  the 
intercession  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  sprinkling  of  his  blood 
in  the  Holy  of  Holies,  and  upon  the  mercy-seat  and  people  ; 
by  which  means  the  ofBsaded  is  reconciled  to  the  offender, 
the  offender  is  brought  into  subjection  to  the  will  of  God ; 


HIS   CREED.  79 

and  the  effect  is,  forgiveness  of  sin,  union  to  the  Divine 
person,  and  to  the  household  of  faith.'7 

"  Art.  X.  I  believe  all  those  for  whom  Christ  intercedes, 
who  are  united  to  God  by  a  living  faith,  and  have  received 
the  forgiveness  of  sin  through  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of 
Christ,  can  never  perish ;  but  are  kept  by  the  mighty  power 
of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation.'7 

"  Art.  XI.  I  believe  that  all  the  promises  of  God  are 
and  will  be  accomplished  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  and  that  none  of 
the  human  family  are  or  can  be  entitled  to  the  promises  of 
grace,  but  those  who  are  born  of  the  Spirit  in  Christ  Jesus, 
any  more  than  the  antediluvians  could  have  been  saved  from 
the  delude  without  entering  the  ark.1' 

' '  Art.  XII.  I  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  will  eventually 
take  away  the  sin  of  the  world,  and  cleanse  the  earth  from 
all  pollution,  so  that  this  earth  will  become  the  abode  of  the 
saints  forever,  by  means  which  he  has  appointed ;  all  be- 
lievers being  regenerated,  sanctified,  justified  and  glorified." 

"  Art.  XIII.  I  believe  that  all  final  impenitents  will  be 
destroyed  from  the  earth,  and  sent  away  into  a  place  pre- 
pared for  the  Devil  and  his  angels." 

"  Art.  XIV.  I  believe  Jesus  Christ  will  come  again  in 
his  glory  and  person  to  our  earth,  where  he  will  accomplish 
his  Divine  purposes  in  the  saving  of  his  people,  destroying 
the  wicked  from  the  earth,  and  taking  away  the  sin  of  the 
world." 

"  Art.  XV.  I  believe  that  the  second  coming  of  Jesus 
Christ  is  near,  even  at  the  door,  even  within  twenty-one 
years,  — on  or  before  1843." 

u  Art.  XVI.  I  believe  that  before  Christ  comes  in  his 
glory,  all  sectarian  principles  will  be  shaken,  and  the  votaries 
of  the  several  sects  scattered  to  the  four  winds ;  and  that 
none  will  be  able  to  stand  but  those  who  are  built  on  the 
word  of  God." 

"  Art.  XVII.  I  believe  in  the  resurrection,  both  of  the 
just  and  of  the  unjust,  —  the  just,  or  believers,  at  Christ's 
second  coming,  and  the  unjust  one  thousand  years  after- 
wards, —  when  the  judgment  of  each  will  take  place  in  their 
order,  at  their  several  resurrections ;  when  the  just  will 
receive  everlasting  life,  and  the  unjust  eternal  condemna- 
tion." 

8 


80  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

'-'  Art.  XVIII.  I  believe  in  the  doctrine  of  election, 
founded  on  the  will,  purpose  and  fore-knowledge  of  God ; 
and  that  all  the  elect  will  be  saved  in  the  kingdom  of  God, 
through  the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  and  the  belief  of  the 
truth." 

"Art.  XIX.  I  believe  in  the  ordinance  of  baptism  by 
immersion,  as  a  representation  of  Christ's  burial  and  resurrec- 
tion, —  also  of  our  death  to  sin  and  life  to  holiness." 

"  Art.  XX.  I  believe  in  the  ordinance  of  the  Lord's 
supper,  to  be  " 

The  last  article  was  left  thus  incomplete,  and  the  series 
of  articles  was  not  extended,  as  it  was  evidently  designed  to 
have  been,  so  as  to  give  an  expression  of  his  faith  on  sub- 
jects not  included  in  the  foregoing.  It  is  not  known  that  his 
views,  as  above  expressed,  ever  underwent  any  change, — 
excepting  as  his  belief  in  the  date  of  the  second  advent  was 
afterwards  shown,  by  the  passing  of  the  time,  to  be  incorrect. 


CHAPTER    V. 

interval  between   his   conversion  and  public  labors LET- 
TERS    HIS     DREAM  ACROSTIC LETTER    FROM     ELDER     HEN- 

DRYX DIALOGUE    WITH    A    PHYSICIAN,    ETC. 

From  the  time  that  Mr.  Miller  became  established  in  his 
religious  faith,  till  he  commenced  his  public  labors,  —  a 
period  of  twelve  or  fourteen  years,  —  there  were  few  promi- 
nent incidents  in  his  life  to  distinguish  him  from  other  men. 
He  was  a  good  citizen,  a  kind  neighbor,  an  affectionate  hus- 
band and  parent,  and  a  devoted  Christian ;  good  to  the  poor, 
and  benevolent,  as  objects  of  charity  were  presented  ;  in  the 
Sunday-school  was  teacher  and  superintendent ;  in  the 
church  he  performed  important  service  as  a  reader  an! 
exhorter,  and,  in  the  support  of  religious  worship,  no  other 
member,  perhaps,  did  as  much  as  he.  He  was  very  exem- 
plary in  his  life  and  conversation,  endeavored  at  all  times  to 
perform  the  duties,  whether  public  or  private,  which  devolved 
on  him,  and  whatever  he  did  was  done  cheerfully,  as  for  the 
glory  of  God.  His  leisure  hours  were  devoted  to  reading 
and  meditation ;  he  kept  himself  well  informed  respecting 


DIFFICULTIES   AND    OBJECTIONS.  81 

the  current  events  of  the  time  ;  occasionally  communicated 
his  thoughts  through  the  press,  and  often,  for  his  own  private 
amusement,  or  for  the  entertainment  of  friends,  indulged  in 
various  poetical  effusions,  which,  for  unstudied  productions, 
are  possessed  of  some  merit ;  but  his  principal  enjoyment 
was  derived  from  the  study  of  the  Bible.  His  state  of  mind 
at  this  time  can  be  better  given  in  his  own  language. 

"  With  the  solemn  conviction, "  writes  Mr.  Miller,  "that 
such  momentous  events  were  predicted  in  the  Scriptures,  to 
be  fulfilled  in  so  short  a  space  of  time,  the  question  came 
home  to  me  with  mighty  power  regarding  my  duty  to  the 
world,  in  view  of  the  evidence  that  had  affected  my  own 
mind.  If  the  end  was  so  near,  it  was  important  that  the 
world  should  know  it.  I  supposed  that  it  would  call  forth 
the  opposition  of  the  ungodly ;  but  it  never  came  into  my 
mind  that  any  Christian  wTould  oppose  it.  I  supposed  that 
all  such  would  be  so  rejoiced,  in  view  of  the  glorious  prospect, 
that  it  would  only  be  necessary  to  present  it,  for  them  to 
receive  it.  My  great  fear  was,  that,  in  their  joy  at  the  hope 
of  a  glorious  inheritance  so  soon  to  be  revealed,  they  would 
receive  the  doctrine  without  sufficiently  examining  the 
Scriptures  in  demonstration  of  its  truth.  I  therefore  feared 
to  present  it,  lest,  by  some  possibility,  I  should  be  in  error, 
and  be  the  means  of  misleading  any. 

"Various  difficulties  and  objections  would  arise  in  my 
mind,  from  time  to  time ;  certain  texts  would  occur  to  me, 
which  seemed  to  weigh  against  my  conclusions ;  and  I  would 
not  present  a  view  to  others,  wThile  any  difficulty  appeared 
to  militate  against  it.  I  therefore  continued  the  study  of  the 
Bible,  to  see  if  I  could  sustain  any  of  these  objections.  My 
object  was  not  merely  to  remove  -them,  but  I  wished  to  see 
if  they  wrere  valid. 

"  Sometimes,  when  at  work,  a  text  would  arise  like  this  : 
(  Of  that  day  and  hour  knoweth  no  man,'  &c. ;  and  how, 
then,  could  the  Bible  reveal  the  time  of  the  advent  ?  I 
would  then  immediately  examine  the  context  in  which  it  was 
found,  and  I  saw  at  once  that,  in  the  same  connection,  wTe 
are  informed  how  we  may  know  when  it  is  nigh,  even  at  the 
doors :  consequently,  that  text  could  not  teach  that  we  could 
know  nothing  of  the  time  of  that  event.  Other  texts,  which 
are  advanced  in  support  of  the  doctrine  of  a  temporal  mil- 


82  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

lennium,  would  arise  ;  but,  on  examining  their  context,  I 
invariably  found  that  they  were  applicable  only  to  the  eternal 
state,  or  were  so  illustrative  of  the  spread  of  the  gospel  here, 
as  to  be  entirely  irrelevant  to  the  position  they  were  adduced 
to  support. 

"Thus  all  those  passages  that  speak  of  the  will  of  God 
being  done  on  earth  as  in  heaven,  of  the  earth  being  full  of 
the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God,  &c,  could  not  be  appli- 
cable to  a  time  when  the  Man  of  Sin  was  prevailing  against 
the  saints,  or  when  the  righteous  and  wicked  were  dwelling 
together,  which  is  to  be  the  case  until  the  end  of  the  world. 
Those  which  speak  of  the  gospel  being  preached  in  all  the 
world,  teach  that,  as  soon  as  it  should  be  thus  preached,  the 
end  was  to  come ;  so  that  it  could  not  be  delayed  a  thousand 
years  from  that  time,  nor  long  enough  for  the  world's  con- 
version after  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  as  a  witness. 

"  The  question  of  the  resurrection  and  judgment  was,  for 
a  time,  an  obstacle  in  the  way.  Being  instructed  that  all 
the  dead  would  be  raised  at  the  tae  time,  I  supposed  it 
must  be  so  taught  in  the  Bible ;  but  I  soon  saw  it  was  one 
of  the  traditions  of  the  elders. 

"  So,  also,  with  the  return  of  the  Jews.  That  question  I 
saw  could  only  be  sustained  by  denying  the  positive  declara- 
tions of  the  New  Testament,  which  assert :  '  There  is  no 
difference  between  the  Jew  and  the  Greek ;'  that  '  The 
promise  that  he  shall  be  the  heir  of  the  world  was  not  to 
Abraham  and  his  seed  through  the  law,  but  through  the 
righteousness  of  faith  ;'  that  '  There  is  neither  Jew  nor 
Greek,  bond  nor  free,  male  nor  female;'  but  that  l  If  ye 
are  Christ's,  then  are  ye  Abraham's  seed,  and  heirs  accord- 
ing to  the  promise.'  I  was,  therefore,  obliged  to  discard  an 
objection  which  asserts  there  is  a  difference  between  the  Jew 
and  Greek ;  that  the  children  of  the  flesh  are  accounted  for 
the  seed,  &c. 

"In  this  way  I  was  occupied  for  five  years,  — from  1818 
to  1823,  —  in  weighing  the  various  objections  which  were 
being  presented  to  my  mind.  During  that  time,  more  objec- 
tions arose  in  my  mind  than  have  been  advanced  by  my 
opponents  since ;  and  I  know  of  no  objection  that  has  been 
since  advanced  which  did  not  then  occur  to  me.  But,  how- 
ever strong  they  at  first  appeared,  after  examining  them  in 


LETTER  TO   A   SISTER.  83 

the  light  of  the  Divine  Word,  I  could  only  compare  them 
to  straws,  laid  down  singly  as  obstacles,  on  a  well-beaten  road  : 
the  car  of  truth  rolled  over  them,  unimpeded  in  its  prog- 
ress. 

"  I  was  then  fully  settled  in  the  conclusions  which  seven 
years  previously  had  begun  to  bear  wTith  such  impressive 
force  upon  my  mind  ;  and  the  duty  of  presenting  the  evidence 
of  the  nearness  of  the  advent  to  others,  —  which  I  had  man- 
aged to  evade  while  I  could  find  the  shadow  of  an  objection 
remaining  against  its  truth,  —  again  came  home  to  me  with 
great  force.  I  had,  previously,  only  thrown  out  occasional 
hints  of  my  views.  I  then  began  to  speak  more  clearly  my 
opinions  to  my  neighbors,  to  ministers,  and  others.  To  my 
astonishment,  I  found  very  few  who  listened  with  any  inter- 
est. Occasionally,  one  would  see  the  force  of  the  evidence ; 
but  the  great  majority  passed  it  by  as  an  idle  tale.  I  was, 
therefore,  disappointed  in  finding  any  who  would  declare  this 
doctrine,  as  I  felt  it  should  be,  for  the  comfort  of  saints,  and 
as  a  warning  to  sinners/'7 

His  correspondence  during  this  period  shows  ardent  long- 
ings for  the  salvation  of  his  relatives  and  friends. 

In  a  letter  to  a  sister,  dated  June  25,  1825,  after  writing 
on  various  subjects  of  family  interest,  he  says :  — 

"  Dear  Brother  and  Sister  :  — All  the  news  that  we 
had  to  tell  haying  been  told  above,  I  will  now  add  a  few 
lines ;  and  0  !  may  they  be  directed  by  Infinite  Wisdom ! 
What  are  your  prospects  for  eternity?  Is  there  a  land  of 
eternal  rest,  beyond  the  confines  of  this  world,  in  prospect  ? 
Do  you  believe  that  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant 
can  and  will  cleanse  you  from  all  sin  ?  Are  you  satisfied 
with  your  present  evidence  of  an  interest  in  that  blood? 
That  we  shall  die  is  certain ;  and  due  preparation  for  a  better 
world  is  wisdom ;  and  we  ought,  as  rational  beings,  to  make 
ourselves  familiar  with  the  road  and  acquainted  with  the 
inhabitants  of  said  country.  0,  my  soul  !  go  thou  to  the 
mansions  of  the  dead,  and  learn  there  the  end  of  all  living. 
That  we  ought  to  be  cleansed  from  all  sin,  in  order  to  be 
happy,  is  certain;  for  sin  constitutes  all  misery;  and  a 
person  living  in  the  enjoyment  (falsely  so  called)  of  sin 
cannot  enter  into  rest.  How  necessary,  then,  is  the  work 
8* 


84  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

of  regeneration  and  sanctification  !  And  may  we  obtain 
that  evidence  which  will  enable  us,  with  Thomas,  to  say, 
1  My  Lord  and  my  God  ! '  Redemption  is  the  work  of  God. 
How  proper,  then,  that  Jesus  should  be  called  the  Re- 
deemer, the  Holy  One  of  Israel !  Redemption  is  from  sin. 
How  improper,  then,  that  we  should  live  any  longer  therein  ! 
We  ought  as  much  to  strive  to  attain  to  perfection  as  if  it 
was  attainable  here  below. 

•'  Lord,  I  believe  thy  heavenly  word; 
Fain  would  I  have  my  soul  renewed. 
I  mourn  for  sin,  and  trust  the  Lord 
To  have  it  pardoned  and  subdued. 

My  King,  my  Saviour,  and  my  God, 

Let  grace  my  sinful  soul  renew; 
Wash  my  offences  with  thy  blood, 

And  make  my  heart  sincere  and  true. 

0  may  thy  grace  its  power  display! 

Let  guilt  and  death  no  longer  reign  ; 
Save  me  in  thine  appointed  way, 

Nor  let  my  humble  faith  be  vain. 

Ye  favored  lands,  who  have  his  word, 

Ye  saints,  who  feel  its  saving  power, 
Unite  your  tongues  to  praise  the  Lord, 

And  his  distinguished  grace  adore.' 

"P.  S.  June  30th.  — I  have  this  day  been  to  White- 
hall, to  see  the  celebrated  Marquis  de  Lafayette,  that  made 
such  a  conspicuous  figure,  half  a  century  ago,  in  our  Rev- 
olution. He  is  a  pleasant-looking  oH  man,  a  friend  to 
freemen,  a  terror  to  tyrants,  and  one  that  has  spent  his 
treasures,  his  blood,  and  the  best  part  of  his  life  in  the  cause 
of  freedom  and  the  rights  of  man.  He  has  suffered  much : 
yet  he  retains  a  good  constitution.  He  goes  a  little  lame, 
occasioned  by  wounds  he  received  in  the  Revolution.  He 
deserves  the  thanks  of  Americans,  and  he  has  received  a 
general  burst  of  gratitude  from  Maine  to  the  Mississippi. 
He  has  visited  every  State  in  the  Union  and  almost  every 
important  town.  I  had  the  pleasure  of  dining  with  him: 
and  after  dinner  he  took  a  passage  for  Xew  York. 

'•'Yours,  &C.J  Wm.  Miller." 

That  Mr.  M.  was  one  of  the  men  prominent  in  his  section 
of  the  country  is  shown  by  his  mingling  with  them,  as  above, 
on  the  various  public  occasions. 


HIS   DREAM.  85 

He  derived  such  pleasure  from  the  study  of  the  Bible, 
that  it  was  almost  his  constant  companion ;  and  a  portion  of 
each  day  was  devoted  to  its  private  perusal.  He  loved  to 
meditate  on  its  teachings  and  to  talk  about  its  promises. 

Being  naturally  of  a  poetical  temperament,  it  would  not 
be  strange  if,  occasionally,  his  dreams  took  shape  from  his 
waking  thoughts.  It  is,  however,  due  to  Mr.  Miller  to  say, 
that  he  had  no  peculiar  faith  in  dreams  ;  and  the  following 
is  given  more  for  its  singularity,  the  simplicity  with  which 
it  is  related,  and  its  devotional  spirit,  than  for  any  other 
reason. 

On  the  evening  of  the  4th  of  November,  1826,  he  sat  up 
to  a  late  hour,  conversing  with  some  friends  on  a  religious 
subject,  and  retired  to  rest  about  twelve  o'clock.  Soon  after 
he  fell  asleep.  His  sleeping  thoughts  assumed  so  distinct  and 
vivid  a  form,  and  made  so  deep  an  impression  on  his  mind, 
that,  two  years  subsequently  (January  17,  1828),  he  com- 
mitted to  writing 

HIS   DREAM. 

"I  thought  I  was  in  a  barren,  uninhabited  country, 
apparently  between  sundown  and  dark  —  neither  night  nor 
day.  The  air  appeared  rather  chilly ;  but  not  so  cold  as 
mid- winter,  but  like  its  beginning.  I  thought  it  stormed, 
but  not  severely :  it  appeared  to  me  like  a  mixture  of  snow 
and  rain.  There  appeared  to  be  some  wind,  yet  not  a  gale ; 
and  everything  wore  a  gloomy  aspect,  yet  I  could  not  tell 
why.  I  seemed  to  be  in  danger,  yet  I  knew  of  no  danger. 
I  thought  I  had  two  companions :  one  a  Baptist  minister, 
the  other  a  Universalist.  They  had  hold  one  of  each  arm, 
and  were  compelling  me  to  come  along,  as  though  we  wrere 
in  great  danger,  and  were  fleeing  for  life.  After  travelling 
a  northern  course  for  some  time,  I  inquired  w^here  we  were. 
They  said,  l  Near  home.'  I  thought  they  then  took  an 
eastward  course,  and  came  to  a  little  spot  of  woods,  consist- 
ing of  small  evergreen  trees,  about  fifteen  feet  high.  They 
then  let  go  their  hold  of  me,  and  lay  down  under  these  trees. 
I  told  them  that  I  would  not  stay  there.  I  then  started, 
and  they  followed.  Our  course  was  then  circuitous,  from 
west  to  south  and  east,  through  a  barren,  level  country,  with 
nothing  to  be  seen  but  now  and  then  a  bush.     After  travel 


86  LIFE   OE  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

ling  for  some  time,  we  came  in  sight  of  a  row  of  lights  in 
the  south-east,  like  a  village  light  in  the  night.  We  steered 
our  course  for  the  lights,  and  soon  came  to  a  highway,  run- 
ning north  and  south.  While  we  were  consulting  which 
road  to  take,  there  came  down  two  women  from  the  north, 
until  they  came  against  us.  I  then  inquired  of  them  where 
we  were.  They  made  no  answer,  but  turned  about,  and 
wTent  back.  I  here  left  my  companions,  and  followed  these 
women.  We  had  not  gone  far  before  we  came  to  an  old  log- 
house  that  stood  by  the  wayside,  into  which  they  entered, 
and  I  followed,  where  I  found  a  small  fire,  and  attempted  to 
warm  myself;  but,  while  I  was  thus  warming  myself,  seeing 
some  suspicious  looks  in  the  countenances  of  those  present,  I 
cast  my  eye  around  to  see  the  cause,  and  beheld  a  great 
beast,  like  a  bear,  gnashing  his  teeth  and  growling  at  me.  I 
started  back  to  the  other  side  of  the  house  at  the  sight.  I 
looked,  and  saw  a  chain  fastened  to  the  logs  of  the  house  and 
around  his  neck.  I  next  saw  a  small  dog,  set  on  by  one 
present,  running  around  the  bear,  and  barking  at  him.  He 
soon  caught  the  dog  in  his  mouth,  when  a  person  present,  in 
endeavoring  to  release  the  dog,  got  his  hand  caught  between 
the  teeth  of  the  bear.  I  then  looked  for  a  weapon  to  relieve 
the  person  thus  situated,  and  found  a  club  about  three  feet 
long,  with  which  I  struck  the  bear  on  the  head,  and  delivered 
the  man.  The  bear  then  came  at  me,  in  a  rage  :  The  club 
now  became  a  man's  arm,  with  a  hand  having  ten  fingers, 
and  those  very  long.  With  this  I  kept  the  bear  off,  and 
soon  got  out  of  the  house  and  ran  with  all  my  might  towards 
the  north.  After  climbing  a  steep  hill  until  I  was  weary,  I 
sat  down,  when  a  person  came  to  me,  and  informed  me  if  I 
would  follow  him  he  would  lead  me  out  of  danger.  I 
followed  him,  and,  after  travelling  up  hill  some  time,  we 
came  to  a  small  house,  where  we  went  in,  and  found  a  num- 
ber of  women  spinning  and  making  garments.  After  some 
conversation,  my  guide  told  me  I  must  go  on.  We  then 
went  out,  and  followed  the  same  northern  course  until  we 
descended  the  hill,  and  came  to  a  large,  low,  old  house, 
where  we  went  in,  and  saw  a  large  number  of  people,  of  all 
ages  and  sexes.  There  appeared  to  be  a  man  present,  who 
went  to  each  one  of  these,  and  whispered  in  their  ears.  All 
appeared  solemn  and  silent.     He  came  to  me,  and  whispered 


HIS   DREAM.  87 

in  my  ears,  {  Love  God  and  your  neighbor,'  and  told  me  to 
remember  it.  I  thought  I  told  him  to  write  it  on  my  heart. 
He  said  he  would  repeat  it,  and  that  I  should  not  forget  it. 
He  did  so.  and  left  me.  Here  I  had  peculiar  feelings.  I 
found  I  had  broken  these  two  great  commands  all  my  life. 
It  seemed  as  though  I  had  never  loved  God  or  my  neighbor. 
My  whole  life  looked  like  a  catalogue  of  crime  ;  and  if  ever 
I  had  any  repentance,  I  had  it  there.  (0.  my  God  !  why 
not  grant  me  such  repentance  when  awake?)  It  was 
unmixed  with  any  pride  or  thoughts  of  carnal  things.  I 
remembered  all  my  sins,  as  I  thought,  and  they  looked 
exceeding  sinful.  If  David  felt  as  I  then  did,  I  do  not 
wonder  that  he  cried  out,  l  Against  Thee,  and  Thee  only 
have  I  sinned.'  I  thought  that  then  my  guide  gave  me  a 
staff,  and  told  me  I  must  travel. 

"  I  went  out  of  the  house,  and,  looking  every  way,  to  see 
which  way  I  should  go,  I  saw  to  the  northward  many  roads 
branching  off  in  different  ways.  While  I  was  considering,  I 
saw  many  people,  young  and  old,  come  out  of  the  house,  and 
run  in  these  roads.  I  then  saw  that  the  roads  were  wide, 
and  well  trod.  I  then  thought  of  the  broad  way  mentioned 
in  the  Scriptures,  and  turned  away,  determining  within  my- 
self not  to  go  therein.  I  then  looked  to  the  south,  and  saw 
a  few  people  come  out  of  the  house,  and  one  by  one  take  a 
south-east  course,  and  followT  each  other  in  a  direct  line,  un- 
til I  lost  sight  of  them.  While  I  stood  thinking  of  them,  I 
heard  a  voice,  as  from  above,  saying,  '  This  is  the  way ; 
walk  ye  in  it.'  Although  I  saw  no  path,  I  followed  the 
same  course,  and  soon  came  to  a  strait  way,  cast  up  with  two 
gulfs  on  either  side.  The  path  was  marked  with  footsteps 
indented  into  the  earth  as  deep  as  a  shoe,  and  only  wide 
enough  for  these  tracks,  one  before  the  other,  in  a  straight 
line.  I  soon  overtook  some  travelling  the  same  road,  and 
one  old  man,  apparently  ninety  or  one  hundred  years  of  age, 
bowed  down  to  the  earth,  and  withered  up.  He  appeared  to 
be  praising  God  that  he  had  mercy  on  such  an  old,  dry  stick, 
while  thousands  younger  were  left  to  go  in  the  broad  way. 
I  thought  my  road  became  more  rugged,  although  the  steps 
continued.  When  I  came  to  any  of  these  places,  by  setting 
my  staff  down  it  became  long  or  short,  as  occasion  might  re- 
quire?  and  I  could  step  up  or  down  with  ease.     My  way  was 


88  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

principally  in  the  ascent  until  I  came  to  a  precipice.  I  could 
look  down  and  see  the  steps  below ;  but  how  to  get  down  I 
could  not  tell.  While  standing  here  the  voice  again  spake  : 
4  Pride  must  be  humbled.7  I  then  had  a  view  of  my  proud 
heart,  and  all  my  ways  seemed  as  though  they  were  full  of 
that  sin.  Even  my  devotions  were  nothing  but  pride  ;  and 
in  the  bitterness  of  my  soul  I  cried  out :  '  True,  I  am  a 
proud,  haughty  wretch  !'  I  then  put  my  staff  down  the 
precipice,  and  it  became  a  guide-pole,  so  that  I,  by  clasping 
both  my  hands  round  it,  slipped  down,  and  then  went  on 
until  I  came  to  a  low  piece  of  wTet  ground.  Here  I  lost  my 
tracks,  and  while  I  was  looking  to  find  my  way,  the  voice  I 
had  heard  before  again  spoke  :  '  The  way  is  marked  with 
blood.'  I  then  felt  surprised  that  I  had  not  remembered  it. 
I  then  looked  around  to  find  the  blood,  and,  looking  a  little 
way  before  me,  I  saw  a  rail-fence,  and,  stepping  up  to  it, 
found  a  streak  of  blood  from  the  top  to  the  bottom,  about  two 
inches  wide.  I  clasped  it  in  my  hands,  and  cried,  '  This  is 
the  blood  of  my  Saviour  !'  While  in  this  situation  I  heard 
a  voice  as  of  a  rushing  wind.  I  looked  up,  and  there  was  a 
small  cloud  over  my  head ;  and  it  began  to  sprinkle  like 
great  drops  of  rain.  I  looked  on  my  hands  and  clothes,  and 
saw  great  drops  of  blood.  I  heard  the  voice  again  saying  : 
■  This  is  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  that  speaketh  better  things 
than  the  blood  of  Abel.'  I  now  had  a  view  of  the  blood  of 
Christ,  its  effects,  and  the  great  love  wherewith  he  loved  us. 
My  mind,  wThich  all  along  had  been  more  or  less  troubled,  by 
fears  and  doubts,  now  became  calm  and  serene,  and,  like 
Job,  I  could  say,  \  I  know  my  Redeemer  liveth.'  My  hard 
heart  melted  within  me,  and  ran  out  with  pure  love  to  Christ. 
While  in  this  ecstasy  of  mind,  I  looked  up  and  saw  a  beam 
of  wood,  extending  from  east  to  west.  I  thought  the  voice 
said  :  i  Behold  the  cross  V  I  again  looked  down,  and  was 
wondering  within  myself  what  these  things  could  mean,  when 
the  voice  said  :  '  Garments  rolled  in  blood.'  I  again  looked 
up,  and  saw  as  it  had  been  a  cloak  dipped  in  blood,  hanging 
over  the  beam,  fourteen  or  fifteen  feet  high. 

"  My  feelings  while  viewing  these  things  I  cannot  de- 
scribe ;  but  it  now  became  light,  and  I  saw  the  sun  as  if 
about  three  hours'  high  in  the  morning.  I  then  travelled  on 
the  same  strait  way  to  the  south-east,  as  before,  with  this  dif- 


HIS  BREAM.  89 

fercnce  —  only  the  streak  of  blood  now  marked  my  path. 
After  travelling  some  time  I  came  to  a  large  house.  It  now 
appeared  to  be  night.  I  went  in,  and  saw  many  people  there. 
The  house  extended  from  west  to  east,  through  the  centre  of 
which  was  a  long  hall,  lighted  up  with  lamps  on  each  side  ; 
and  on  each  side  of  this  hall  doors  opened  into  small  apart- 
ments like  bed-rooms.  I  here  found  my  former  guide,  who 
informed  me  that  I  must  travel  through  this  hall.  He  also 
gave  me  a  little  book,^  and  said  that  that  would  direct  me. 
He  then  cautioned  me  to  '  beware  of  the  buttery.'  f  I 
put  the  book  into  my  pocket,  and  walked  through.  As  I 
passed  along,  the  doors  on  each  side  of  the  hall  would  open, 
and  spirits,  as  it  then  appeared  to  me,  would  brush  by  me, 
and  try  to  force  me  into  these  rooms.  I  kept  right  straight 
forward  till  I  came  to  the  east  end  of  the  room.  Here  I 
found  two  closed  doors,  and  while  I  stood  considering  which 
door  to  enter,  one  of  them  opened  and  discovered  to  me  a  room 
filled  with  all  the  dainties  man  could  wish  to  eat  or  drink ; 
and  some  persons  in  the  room  invited  me  to  enter.  I  was  at 
a  loss  what  to  do ;  but,  remembering  the  caution  I  had,  I 
put  my  hand  in  my  pocket  to  find  my  little  book.  I  pulled 
out  one,  and  found  it  was  not  the  same,  and  so  I  threw  it 
down,  and  pulled  out  two  more,  one  after  the  other,  and 
threw  them  down  also.J  I  then  pulled  out  the  one  that  had 
been  given  me,  and,  on  opening  it,  I  read  Isa.  48:  17, — 
'  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  thy  Redeemer,  the  Holy  One  of  Is- 
rael ;  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God  which  teacheth  thee  to  profit, 
which  leadeth  thee  by  the  way  that  thou  shouldest  go.'  The 
other  door  then  opened,  and  I  saw  a  dark,  winding  stairway. 
On  the  bottom  lay  a  young  child.  I  took  it  up,  and  reached 
it  back  to  some  that  stood  behind  me.  They  refused  to  take 
it.     I  then  laid  it  down  again,  and  stepped  in.     All  was 

*  Mr.  Miller  ne^er  regarded  this  dream  as  at  all  ominous  ;  and  yet, 
through  life,  it  often  recurred  to  his  mind.  On  the  occasion  of  his  first 
visit  to  Boston,  he  was  presented  with  a  small  Polyglot  Bible,  which 
strongly  reminded  him  of  the  book  given  him  in  his  dream,  and  like  that 
he  made  it  his  pocket  companion. 

t  This  is  a  very  obscure  phrase  in  the  connection,  unless  it  is  to  guard 
against  the  pleasures  of  the  world. 

$  When  he  first  saw  Dr.  Dowling's  work —  Miller  Used  up  for  a  Shil- 
ling—  and  other  similar  works,  he  was  forcibly  reminded  of  those  spuri- 
ous books  which  he  threw  away  in  his  dream.  He  considered  the  little 
guide-book  of  more  consequence  than  all  these. 


90  LIFE    OP   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

dark  and  gloomy  as  the  door  of  death.  I  remembered  no 
more  until  I  arrived  at  the  top  of  the  stairs,  where  I  found 
myself,  as  I  then  thought,  in  an  upper  room,  filled  with  the 
purest  light  that  my  eyes  had  ever  beheld.  *  I  looked  for 
the  cause  —  there  was  none.  The  light  was  brighter  than 
the  brightest  rays  of  the  sun :  yet  it  did  not  dazzle  —  it 
was  as  soft  and  easy  to  behold  as  the  morning  tints.  The 
room  appeared  to  be  arched,  yet  I  could  not  discover  its 
height.  The  floor  appeared  like  crystal  glass,  very  thick, 
yet  it  did  not  restrain  the  sight,  for  I  could  see  all  below. 
The  room  extended  from  east  to  west.  On  each  hand  was  a 
walk,  on  which  I  saw  manv  walking.  I  was  directed  to 
walk  with  them,  when  I  found  that  they  were  singing.  The 
only  words  I  could  recollect  were,  •  Hallelujah  to  the 
Lamb  !'  The  music  was  soft,  and  sweet ;  it  fell  on  the  ear 
without  any  jar  or  pain.  I  beheld  many  persons  that  I 
knew. —  the  old  man  that  I  had  seen  before.  I  congrat- 
ulated him  on  his  safe  arrival  at  last.  I  heard  him  sing. 
ZSo  silent  one  was  there.  I  thought  of  the  love  they  had 
one  for  another.  I  thought  I  felt  its  flame  —  its  pure,  un- 
adulterated love.  Xo  mixture  of  self  beyond  another.  I 
saw  persons  of  all  denominations  of  Christians,  yet  all  distinc- 
tions were  taken  away.  Here  was  a  communion  indeed — here 
was  no  ennui  —  no  hatred  —  no  selfish  principles  to  build  up 
—  no  evil  thoughts  —  nothing  to  hurt  or  annoy.  (0  !  ye 
selfish  votaries,  could  you  but  see  this  happy  throng,  you 
would  cover  your  faces  with  shame  :  you  would  hide  your- 
selves, if  possible,  from  the  face  of  the  Lamb,  and  Him  that 
sitteth  on  the  throne.)  I  felt  myself  free  from  every  clog. 
and  all  my  soul  was  swallowed  up  in  this  celestial  throng.  I 
then  thought  it  was  a  dream — a  slight  and  disagreeable  feel- 
ing passed  over  my  mind,  to  think  I  must  return  and  expe- 
rience again  the  woes  of  life.  I  shuddered  at  the  thought, 
and  then  awoke."' 

*  The  finding  himself  at  the  top  of  the  stairs  was  a  source  of  great  con- 
solation to  him  ;  and  he  often  referred  to  it.  in  connection  with  the  im- 
pression that  he  had.  that,  if  called  to  the  world  of  spirits,  when  absent 
from  the  body  he  should  be  present  with  the  Lord.  He  had  a  desire  to 
live  till  the  Lord's  coming,  but  would  refer  to  this  "  upper  room,5'  as  a 
very  desirable  place  to  spend  the  time  before  the  resurrection,  if  he  should 
not  live  till  that  event  :  and  this,  he  thought,  was  designed  to  teach  him 
that  he  should  not,  and  to  comfort  him,  in  view  of  the  prospect  of  death. 


AN   ACROSTIC.  91 

By  the  following  lines,  written  by  Mr.  Miller  at  the  place 
of  his  birth,  it  appears  that  he  visited  the  old  homestead  in 
Pittsfield.  Mass..  in  1827,  — the  lines  being  dated  Oct.  16th 
of  that  year.  They  are  an  Acrostic  on  his  own  name,  and 
are  given,  more  as  a  memento  of  the  past,  than  for  any  poetic 
merit.     He  must  have  been  at  this  time  forty-five  years  old. 

M  W  hy  was  I  here  the  light  brought  to  behold  ? 
I  nconstant  life  here  first  her  pulses  told  ; 
L  ife's  blood  here  through  my  veins  began  to  flow ; 
L  o  !  here  began  my  pilgrimage  below  3 
I  here  first  lisped  with  infant's  prattling  tongue, 
A  nd  here  heard  mother's  ■  hush-a-baby  '  song. 
M  urmuring,  this  pebbly  brook  taught  me  to  play. 

M  eandering  stream,  by  thee  I  used  to  stray  ; 
I  n  thee  first  saw  the  playful  silvery  fish  ; 
L  earnt  here  t'  express  the  infant's  simple  wish, 
L  ove,  hope,  and  joy.     I  here  my  days  began  ; 
E  ven  here  the  broomstick  rode,  the  circle  ran  ; 
Rejoiced  and  prattled  here  to  mimic  man." 

In  the  winter  of  1828,  the  church  in  Low  Hampton,  of 
which  Mr.  Miller  was  a  member,  was  refreshed  by  an  out- 
pouring of  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  a  letter,  dated  March  12, 
written  to  Elder  Hendryx,  to  whom  reference  has  before 
been  made,  Mr.  Miller  says  :  "  One  young  man  came  to  my 
house  last  night,  after  nine  o'clock,  to  request  prayers.  He  said 
he  had  been  eight  years  under  conviction,  and  appeared  to  be 
almost  in  despair.  I  thought  I  could  say  to  him,  as  did  John 
the  Baptist  to  his  disciples  :  •  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  that 
taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world  !  ■  Twelve  or  fourteen  re- 
quested prayers  last  Sunday  evening.  It  is  really  the  work 
of  the  Lord.  I  never  lived  in  a  reformation  so  general,  so 
solemn,  and  with  so  little  noise.  Surely,  we  have  reason 
to  rejoice  and  be  glad.  The  Lord  has  remembered  the  low 
state  of  his  people,  and  hath  come  down  to  deliver.  Two  of 
my  children,  William  and  Bellona,  as  I  have  a  good  degree 
of  hope,  are  subjects  of  grace.     Pray  for  us.'' 

In  the  same  letter  he  makes  mention  of  trials,  as  well  a3 
blessings.  He  says  :  "  On  Saturday,  the  first  day  of  March, 
our  meeting-house  was  consumed  by  fire.  We  should  have 
almost  despaired  of  ever  building  again,  had  not  the  Lord 
visited  us  by  his  grace,  and  likewise  opened  the  hearts  of  our 
Christian  friends  from  abroad.  .§400  have  been  subscribed 
from  the  adjoining  towns.  There  is  now  some  prospect  that 
9 


92  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

we  shall  build.  You  know  we  are  weak  in  numbers.  We 
are  really  so  in  resources.  I  must  bend  my  whole  force  to 
gain  the  above-mentioned  object.5' 

Mr.  Miller  succeeded  in  the  accomplishment  of  his  wishes, 
assisting  according  to  his  ability  and  known  liberality. 

He  continued  to  make  the  Bible  his  daily  study,  and  be- 
came more  and  more  convinced  that  he  had  a  personal  duty 
to  perform  respecting  what  he  conceived  the  Bible  to  teach 
of  the  nearness  of  the  Advent.  These  impressions  he  thus 
describes  : 

"  When  I  was  about  my  business,  it  was  continually  ring- 
ing in  my  ears,  £  Go  and  tell  the  world  of  their  danger.' 
This  text  was  constantly  occurring  to  me :  '  When  I  say 
unto  the  wicked,  0  wicked  man,  thou  shalt  surely  die;  if 
thou  dost  not  speak  to  warn  the  wicked  from  his  way,  that 
wicked  man  shall  die  in  his  iniquity ;  but  his  blood  will  I  re- 
quire at  thy  hand.  Nevertheless,  if  thou  warn  the  wicked 
of  his  way  to  turn  from  it ;  if  he  do  not  turn  from  his  wTay, 
he  shall  die  in  his  iniquity  ;  but  thou  hast  delivered  thy  soul.' 
—  Ezek.  33  :  8,  9.  I  felt  that,  if  the  wicked  could  be 
effectually  warned,  multitudes  of  them  would  repent ;  and 
that,  if  they  were  not  warned,  their  blood  might  be  required 
at  my  hand.  I  did  all  I  could  to  avoid  the  conviction  that 
anything  was  required  of  me  ;  and  I  thought  that  by  freely 
speaking  of  it  to  all,  I  should  perform  my  duty,  and  that 
God  would  raise  up  the  necessary  instrumentality  for  the 
accomplishment  of  the  work.  I  prayed  that  some  minister 
might  see  the  truth,  and  devote  himself  to  its  promulgation ; 
but  still  it  was  impressed  upon  me,  '  Go  and  tell  it  to  the 
wrorld  :  their  blood  will  I  require  at  thy  hand.'  The  more 
I  presented  it  in  conversation,  the  more  dissatisfied  I  felt  with 
myself  for  withholding  it  from  the  public.  I  tried  to  excuse 
myself  to  the  Lord  for  not  going  out  and  proclaiming  it  to 
the  world.  I  told  the  Lord  that  I  was  not  used  to  public 
speaking ;  that  I  had  not  the  necessary  qualifications  to  gain 
the  attention  of  an  audience ;  that  I  was  very  diffident,  and 
feared  to  go  before  the  world  ;  that  they  would  i  not  believe 
me  nor  hearken  to  my  voice  ;'  that  I  was  c  slow  of  speech, 
and  of  a  slow  tongue.'     But  I  could  get  no  relief." 

In  this  way  he  struggled  on  for  nine  years  longer,  pursu- 
ing the  study  of  the  Bible,  doing  all  he  could  to  present  the 


LETTER   FROM   ELDER   HENDRYX.  93 

nearness  of  Christ's  coming  to  those  "whom  circumstances 
threw  in  his  way ;  but  resisting  his  impressions  of  duty  to 
go  out  as  a  public  teacher.  He  was  then  fifty  years  old, 
and  it  seemed  impossible  for  him  to  surmount  the  obstacles 
-which  lay  in  his  path,  to  successfully  present  it  in  a  public 
manner. 

His  freedom  to  converse  on  the  subject,  and  the  ability 
with  which  he  was  able  to  defend  his  own  views,  and  oppose 
those  differing  from  him,  had  given  him  no  little  celebrity  in 
his  denomination  in  all  that  region ;  and  some  were  rather 
shy  in  approaching  him.  Elder  T.  Hendryx,  a  Baptist 
clergyman  now  in  the  State  of  Pennsylvania,  who  has  kindly 
furnished  the  biographer  with  many  original  letters  from 
Mr.  Miller,  thus  speaks  of  his  first  acquaintance  with  him  : 

"  My  first  acquaintance  with  Brother  Miller  was  in  the 
summer  of  1831.  I  had  been  requested  to  visit  the  Baptist 
church  in  Hampton,  and  concluded  to  go.  When  about  to 
start,  I  was  informed  by  a  brother  in  the  church  of  which  I 
was  a  member,  in  Salem,  N.  Y.,  that  there  was  a  brother  in 
the  Hampton  church,  possessing  considerable  influence,  who 
had  many  curious  notions  on  doctrinal  points,  and  on  the 
prophecies, —  particularly  on  the  latter;  and  also  (to  use  the 
brother's  language)  that  he  was  '  hard  on  ministers  who 
differed  with  him.'  Having  recently  commenced  preaching, 
without  much  confidence  in  my  own  ability,  and  not  having 
made  any  engagement  to  the  church,  I  at  first  almost  con- 
cluded not  to  go.  On  further  reflection  I  decided  to  go,  and 
put  my  trust  in  Him,  who  had  said,  '  Lo,  I  am  with  you  al- 
ways.' On  my  way,  I  endeavored,  by  prayer  and  medita- 
tion, to  divest  myself  of  all  prejudice  against  his  peculiar 
notions,  whatever  they  might  be  (for  as  yet  I  was  ignorant 
of  them),  and  at  the  same  time  to  fortify  myself  against 
being  led  into  error  by  him.  I  arrived  at  Bro.  Miller's  on  the 
6th  of  July,  1881.  You  may  well  suppose  that  my  situa- 
tion was  not  very  enviable.  I  moved  tremblingly  and  with 
the  utmost  caution.  In  spite  of  me,  I  could  not  act  like  my- 
self; and  it  was  not  till  I  had  been  there  nearly  a  week,  and 
preached  several  discourses,  that  I  could  feel  at  home,  or  en- 
joy my  wonted  freedom  in  preaching  the  word.  Several 
other  ministering  brethren  visited  at  Bro.  M.'s  during  my 
stay  there,  and  I  found  that  I  was  not  altogether  alone  in 


94  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM  MILLER. 

those  feelings.  But  how  perfectly  groundless  those  fears  ! 
Instead  of  pouncing  upon  my  errors  like  the  tiger,  no  broth- 
er ever  dealt  with  me  more  tenderly,  or  exhibited  a  better 
spirit  in  presenting  his  views. 

"After  being  with  Bro.  M.  some  time,  he  asked  me  my 
views  on  the  millennium.  Having  thrown  off  all  reserve.  I 
readily  gave  them.  I  had  embraced  the  old  view  —  the 
world's  conversion  a  thousand  years  before  the  advent ;  and 
answered  him  accordingly.  His  reply  was  :  *  "Well.  Bro.  H., 
prove  it !  You  know  I  want  Bible  for  all  that  I  receive.7 
•  Well/'  said  I:  and.  taking  my  Bible.  I  turned  to  the  20th 
of  Rev.,  and  was  about  to  read,  when  I  thought  I  would 
examine  it  again,  and  with  very  close  attention.  I  was  in  a 
deep  study.  Bro.  M.  was  waiting  and  watching  me  closely. 
He  began  to  smile.  l  Why  don't  you  read.  Bro.  H.?7  said 
he.  I  was  astonished :  for  I  could  not  make  it  out.  At  last 
I  said :  *  I  go  home  next  Monday.  I  will  draw  the  passages 
off,  and  hand  them  to  you  when  I  return.7  I  took  some  four 
days  for  it,  and  gave  him  a  long  list  of  passages.  He  read 
them,  and  said:  -'Bro.  H.,  what  has  become  of  your  old 
theory]  This  is  mine.7  'Well,7  said  I,  l  it  is  mine,  too.' 
In  my  examination,  my  l  theory '  had  been  overturned,  and 
I  came  out  where  I  now  stand. 

1 -One  thing  I  observed  in  Bro.  M.'s  character:  If  he 
ever  dealt  harshly  with  a  brother  for  holding  an  error,  it 
was  because  he  saw,  or  thought  he  saw,  a  spirit  of  self- 
importance  in  him.77 

The  labors  of  Elder  Hendryx  were  attended  with  a 
blessing,  as  appears  from  a  letter  of  Mr.  Miller's  to  him, 
dated  August  9,  1831.  In  it  he  says:  "  The  Lord  is 
pouring  out  his  Spirit  among  us,  but  not  in  so  powerful  a 
manner  as  I  could  wish.  Baptism  has  been  administered 
every  Sabbath  but  one  since  you  were  here.  Two  or  three 
have  obtained  hope  every  week.77 

As  Mr.  Miller's  opinions  respecting  the  nearness  and 
nature  of  the  millennium  became  known,  they  naturally 
elicited  a  good  deal  of  comment  among  his  friends  and  neigh- 
bors, and  also  among  those  at  a  distance.  Some  of  their 
remarks,  not  the  most  complimentary  to  his  sanity,  would 
occasionally  be  repeated  to  him. 

Having  heard  that  a  physician  in  his  neighborhood  had 


DIALOGUE   WITH   A   PHYSICIAN.  95 

said,  "  Esquire  Miller/'  as  he  was  familiarly  called,  "  was 
a  fine  man  and  a  good  neighbor,  but  was  a  monomaniac  on 
th'e  subject  of  the  advent,"  Mr.  M.  was  humorously  inclined 
to  let  him  prescribe  for  his  case. 

One  of  his  children  being  sick  one  day,  he  sent  fji  tHb 
doctor,  who,  after  prescribing  for  the  child,  noticed  that  Mr. 
Miller  was  very  mute  in  one  corner,  and  asked  what  ailed 
him. 

"Well,  I  hardly  know,  doctor.  I  want  you  to  see  what 
does,  and  prescribe  for  me."' 

The  doctor  felt  of  his  pulse,  &c,  and  could  not  decide 
respecting  his  malady ;  and  inquired  what  he  supposed  was 
his  complaint. 

"Well,"  says  Mr.  Miller,  "I  don't  know  but  I  am  a 
monomaniac :  and  I  want  you  to  examine  me,  and  see  if  I 
am ;  and,  if  so,  cure  me.  Can  you  tell  when  a  man  is  a 
monomaniac?" 

The  doctor  blushed,  and  said  he  thought  he  could. 

Mr.  Miller  wished  to  know  how. 

"Why,"  said  the  doctor,  "  a  monomaniac  is  rational  on 
all  subjects  but  one ;  and,  when  you  touch  that  particular 
subject,  he  will  become  raving." 

"  Well,"  says  Mr.  Miller,  "  I  insist  upon  it  that  you  see 
whether  I  am  in  reality  a  monomaniac  :  and  if  I  am,  you  shall 
prescribe  for  and  cure  me.  You  shall,  therefore,  sit  down 
with  me  two  hours,  while  I  present  the  subject  of  the  advent 
to  you,  and,  if  I  am  a  monomaniac,  by  that  time  you  will 
discover  it." 

The  doctor  was  somewhat  disconcerted ;  but  Mr.  Miller 
insisted,  and  told  him,  as  it  was  to  present  the  state  of  his 
mind,  he  might  charge  for  his  time  as  in  regular  practice. 

The  doctor  finally  consented;  and,  at  Mr.  Miller's  request, 
opened  the  Bible  and  read  from  the  8th  of  Daniel.  As  he 
read  along,  Mr.  Miller  inquired  what  the  ram  denoted,  with 
the  other  symbols  presented.  The  doctor  had  read  Newton, 
and  applied  them  to  Persia,  Greece,  and  Rome,  as  Mr.  Miller 
did. 

Mr.  Miller  then  inquired  how  long  the  vision  of  those 
empires  was  to  be. 

"2,300  days." 

9* 


96  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

"What!"  said  Mr.  Miller,  "  could  those  great  empires 
cover  only  2300  literal  days  ?" 

"W&jjv"  sa^  Ae  doctor.  "  those  days  are  years,  accord- 
ins:  to  all  commentators  :  and  those  kingdoms  are  to  continue 
2300  years.'' 

Mr;  M.  then  asked  him  to  turn  to  the  2d  of  Daniel,  and 
to  the  7th :  all  of  which  he  explained  the  same  as  Mr.  Miller. 
He  was  then  asked  if  he  knew  when  the  2300  days  would 
end.  He  did  not  know,  as  he  could  not  tell  when  they  com- 
menced. 

Mr.  Miller  told  him  to  read  the  9th  of  Daniel.  He  read 
down  till  he  came  to  the  21st  verse,  when  Daniel  saw  "  the 
man  Gabriel,"  whom  he  had  "  seen  in  the  vision." 

"  In  what  vision  ?  "  Mr.  Miller  inquired. 

"Why,"  said  the  doctor,  "  in  the  vision  of  the  8th  of 
Daniel." 

ilt  Wherefore,  understand  the  matter  and  consider  the 
vision.'  He  had  now  come,  then,  to  make  him  under- 
stand that  vision,  had  he  ]  " 

"  Yes."  said  the  doctor. 

"  Well,  seventy  weeks  are  determined;  what  are  these 
seventy  weeks  a  part  of?" 

11  Of  the  2300  days." 

"  Then  do  they  begin  with  the  2300  days  ?  " 

u  Yes."  said  the  doctor. 

'•When  did  they  end?" 

'•In  A.  D.  33." 

"  Then  how  far  would  the  2300  extend  after  33  ?  " 

The  doctor  subtracted  490  from  2300,  and  replied,  1810. 
"Why,"  said  he,  "  that  is  past." 

"  But"  said  Mr.  Miller,  "  there  were  1810  from  33:  in 
what  year  would  that  come  ?  " 

The  doctor  saw  at  once  that  the  83  should  be  added,  and 
set  down  33  and  1810,  and,  adding  them,  replied,  1843. 

At  this  unexpected  result  the  doctor  settled  back  in  his 
chair  and  colored :  but  immediately  took  his  hat  and  left  the 
house  in  a  rage. 

The  next  day  he  again  called  on  Mr.  Miller,  and  looked 
as  though  he  had  been  in  the  greatest  mental  agony. 

"Why,  Mr.  Miller,"  said  he,  "I  am  going  to  hell.  I 
have  not  slept  a  wink  since  I  was  here  yesterday.     I  have 


PUBLIC   LABORS.  97 

looked  at  the  question  in  every  light,  and  the  vision  must 
terminate  about  A.  D.  1843;  and  I  am  unprepared,  and 
must  go  to  hell." 

Mr.  Miller  calmed  him,  and  pointed  him  to  the  ark  of 
safety ;  and  in  about  a  week,  calling  each  day  on  Mr.  M., 
he  found  peace  to  his  soul,  and  went  on  his  way  rejoicing, 
as  great  a  monomaniac  as  Mr.  Miller.  He  afterwards 
acknowledged  that,  till  he  made  the  figures  1843,  he  had  no 
idea  of  the  result  to  which  he  was  coming. 


CHAPTER    VI. 


COMMENCEMENT     OE     PUBLIC     LABORS  —  PUBLISHES    HIS     VIEWS    IN 

PAMPHLET  —  INTERVIEW    ON     THE     HUDSON    RIVER    BOAT HIS 

REGARD   FOR    THE    BIBLE  —  CORRESPONDENCE,    ETC. 

The  public  labors  of  Mr.  Miller,  according  to  the  best 
evidence  to  be  obtained,  date  from  the  autumn  of  1831.  He 
had  continued  to  be  much  distressed  respecting  his  duty  to 
"  go  and  tell  it  to  the  world, "  which  was  constantly  im- 
pressed on  his  mind.  One  Saturday,  after  breakfast,  he  sat 
down  at  his  desk  to  examine  some  point,  and,  as  he  arose  to 
go  out  to  work,  it  came  home  to  him  with  more  force  than 
ever,  "  Go  and  tell  it  to  the  world."     He  thus  writes  :  — 

"  The  impression  was  so  sudden,  and  came  with  such 
force,  that  I  settled  down  into  my  chair,  saying,  c  I  can't  go, 
Lord.'  '  Why  not?'  seemed  to  be  the  response;  and  then 
all  my  excuses  came  up  —  my  want  of  ability,  &c. ;  but  my 
distress  became  so  great,  I  entered  into  a  solemn  covenant 
with  God,  that,  if  he  would  open  the  way,  I  would  go  and 
perform  my  duty  to  the  world.  i  What  do  you  mean  by 
opening  the  way?'  seemed  to  come  to  me.  'Why,'  said  I, 
'  if  I  should  have  an  invitation  to  speak  publicly  in  any 
place,  I  will  go  and  tell  them  what  I  find  in  the  Bible  about 
the  Lord's  coming.'  Instantly  all  my  burden  was  gone,  and 
I  rejoiced  that  I  should  not  probably  be  thus  called  upon ; 
for  I  had  never  had  such  an  invitation.  My  trials  were  not 
known,  and  I  had  but  little  expectation  of  being  invited  to 
any  field  of  labor. 


98  LIFE    OP    WILLIAM   MILLER. 

i:  In  about  half  an  hour  from  this  rime,  before  I  had  left 
the  room,  a  son  of  Mr.  Guilford,  of  Dresden,  about  sixteen 
miles  from  my  residence,  came  in.  and  said  that  his  father 
had  sent  for  me,  and  wished  me  to  go  home  with  him. 
Supposing  that  he  wished  to  see  me  on  some  business.  I 
asked  him  what  he  wanted.  He  replied,  that  there  was  to 
be  no  preaching  in  their  church  the  next  day.  and  his  father 
wished  to  have  me  come  and  talk  to  the  people  on  the  sub- 
ject of  the  Lord's  coming.  I  was  immediately  angry  with 
myself  for  having  made  the  covenant  I  had  :  I  rebelled  at 
once  against  the  Lord,  and  determined  not  to  go.  I  lei:  the 
boy.  without  giving  him  any  answer,  and  retired  in  great 
distress  to  a  grove  near  by.  There  I  struggled  with  the 
Lord  for  about  an  hour,  endeavoring  to  release  myself  from 
the  covenant  I  had  made  with  him :  but  I  could  set  nor: 
It  was  impressed  upon  my  conscience.  '  Will  yon  make  a 
covenant  with  God.  and  break  it  so  sc  :ii  !  '  and  the  exc 
ing  sinfulness  of  thus  doing  overwhelmed  me.  I  finally 
suDinitted.  and  promised  the  Lord  that,  if  he  would  sustain 
me.  I  would  go.  trusting  in  him  to  give  mi-  grace  and  ability 
to  perform  all  he  should  require  of  me.  I  returned  to  the 
house,  and  found  the  bov  still  waiting.  He  remained  till 
after  dinner,  and  I  returned  with  him  to  Dresden. 

"  The  next  day.  which,  as  nearly  as  I  can  remember,  was 
about  the  first  Sabbath  in  August.  1833,*  I  delivered  my 
first  public  lecture  on  the  Second  Advent.  The  house  was 
well  filled  with  an  attentive  audience.  As  soon  as  I  com- 
menced speaking,  all  my  diffidence  and  embarrassment  were 
gone,  and  I  felt  impressed  only  vrith  the  greatness  of  the 
subject,  which,  by  the  providence  of  God.  I  was  enabled  to 
present.  At  the  close  of  the  services  on  the  Sabbath,  I  was 
requested  to  remain  and  lecture  during  the  week,  vrith  which 
I  complied.  They  flocked  in  from  the  neighboring  towns :  a 
revival  commenced,  and  it  was  said  that  in  thirteen  families 
all  but  two  persons  were  hopefully  converted. 

*  The  printed  article  from  which  this  is  copied  was  written  in  1  S-l-5. 
By  an  examination  of  his  correspondence,  it  appears  that  he  raus: 
begun  to  lecture  in  August,  1831.  So  that  this  data  is  a  r^istake  of  the 
printer  or  an  error  in  Mr.  Miller's  memory.  As  no  mention  is  made  of 
this  in  the  letter  to  Elder  Hendryx,  from  which  the  previous  extract  is 
made,  he  could  not  have  gone  to  Dresden  before  the  second  Sabbath  in 
August.  1631. 


PUBLISHES   HIS   VIEWS.  99 

c:  On  the  Monday  following  I  returned  home,  and  found 
a  letter  from  Elder  Fuller,  of  Poultney,  Vt.,  requesting  me 
to  go  and  lecture  there  on  the  same  subject.  They  had  not 
heard  of  my  going  to  Dresden.  I  went  to  Poultney,  and 
lectured  there  with  similar  effect. 

"  From  thence  I  went,  by  invitation,  to  Pawlet,  and  other 
towns  in  that  vicinity.  The  churches  of  Congregationalists, 
Baptists  and  Methodists,  were  thrown  open.  In  almost 
every  place  I  visited  my  labors  resulted  in  the  reclaiming  of 
backsliders,  and  the  conversion  of  sinners.  I  was  usually 
invited  to  fields  of  labor  by  the  ministers  of  the  several  con- 
gregations whom  I  visited,  who  gave  me  their  countenance ; 
and  I  have  never  labored  in  any  place  to  which  I  was  not 
previously  invited.  The  most  pressing  invitations  from  the 
ministry,  and  the  leading  members  of  the  churches,  poured 
in  continually  from  that  time,  during  the  whole  period  of  my 
public  labors,  and  with  more  than  one  half  of  which  I  was 
unable  to  comply.  Churches  were  thrown  open  everywhere, 
and  I  lectured,  to  crowded  houses,  through  the  western  part 
of  Vermont,  the  northern  part  of  New  York,  and  in  Canada 
East;  and  powerful  reformations  were  the  results  of  my 
labors." 

Soon  after  he  began  to  lecture  on  the  subject,  Mr.  Miller 
began  to  be  importuned  to  write  out  and  publish  his  views. 
In  a  letter  to  Elder  Hendryx,  dated  January  25,  1832,  he 
says : 

"  I  have  written  a  few  Numbers  on  the  coming  of  Christ 
and  the  final  destruction  of  the  Beast,  when  his  body  shall  be 
given  to  the  burning  flame.  They  may  appear  in  the  Vermont 
Telegraph ;  if  not,  in  pamphlet  form.  They  are  written  in 
letters  to  Elder  Smith,  of  Poultney,  and  he  has  liberty  to 
publish." 

On  the  same  occasion,  he  adds:  "I  am  more  and  more 
astonished  at  the  harmony  and  strength  of  the  word  of  God ; 
and  the  more  I  read,  the  more  I  see  the  folly  of  the  infidel 
in  rejecting  this  word." 

The  articles  referred  to  were  sent  as  anonymous  to  the 
editor  of  the  Telegraph,  who  declined  their  publication  unless 
informed  of  the  name  of  the  writer.  This  being  communi- 
cated to  him,  they  appeared,  in  a  series  of  sixteen  articles, 
over  the  initials  of  W.  M.     The  first  article  was  published 


100  LIFE    OE   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

in  the  paper  of  May  15,  1832,  and  they  caused  much  con- 
versation and  discussion. 

Soon  after  this,  he  addressed  another  letter  to  Elder 
Hendryx,  which  is  so  quaintly  written,  contains  so  much  of 
general  interest,  and  is  so  illustrative  of  his  habits  of  thought 
and  modes  of  expression,  that  it  is  here  given : 

"  Hampton,  March  2Qth,  1832. 

"  Dear  Bro.  Hendryx  :  — I  received  your  favor  of  the 
19th  inst.  day  before  yesterday,  and  should  have  begun  to 
answer  it  then,  but,  on  coming  home,  I  found  Bro.  D.  at  my 
house,  a  licentiate  from  Hamilton,  who  came  on  purpose  to 
learn  these  strange  notions  of  '  crazy  Miller's,'  or  at  least  to 
save  Bro.  Miller,  if  possible,  from  going  down  to  the  grave 
with  such  an  error.  He  was  a  stranger  to  me ;  but,  after  he 
introduced  himself,  we  went  to  work,  night  and  day,  and  he 
has  just  left  me, —  Monday,  3  o'clock,  p.  M.  He  has  got  his 
load,  and,  as  he  says,  he  never  was  so  loaded  before. 

"  You  may  say  this  is  boasting.  No,  no,  Bro.  Hendryx, 
you  know  better.  I  only  made  him  read  Bible,  and  I  held 
the  Concordance.  No  praise  to  me ;  give  God  the  glory. 
At  any  rate,  he  will  find  it  hard  to  resist  the  truth.  He 
wants  me  to  let  him  come  and  board  with  me,  two  or  three 
months,  to  study  the  Bible.  He  is  a  young  man,  of  brilliant 
talents ;  he  preached  two  sermons  here  yesterday,  and  they 
were  very  well  done.  I  have  somebody  to  labor  with  almost 
daily.  I  have  been  into  Poultney,  and  some  other  places, 
to  lecture  on  the  coming  of  Christ ;  and,  in  every  instance. 
I  have  had  large  assemblies.  There  is  increasing  anxiety  on 
the  subject  in  this  quarter ;  but  they  will  see  greater  signs 
of  these  times  soon,  so  that  Christians  will  believe  in  his 
coming  and  kingdom.  The  harvest  is  about  closing  up,  and 
the  wrath  of  God  is  about  to  be  poured  upon  our  world. 
Pestilence,  sword,  and  famine,  will  succeed  each  other  in 
swift  succession,  and  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  will  soon  be 
destroyed  by  the  'stone  cut  out  of  the  mountain  without 
hands.'  Yes,  brother, —  it  will  soon  be  over  when  sinners 
can  be  converted.  I  would,  therefore,  advise  you  to  lead 
your  hearers  by  slow  and  sure  steps  to  Jesus.  Christ. 

"  I  say  slow,  because  I  expect  all  are  not  strong  enough 
to  run  yet ;    and  sure3  because  the  Bible  is  a  sure  word ;  — 


CORRESPONDENCE.  101 

and  where  your  hearers  are  not  well  indoctrinated,  you  must 
preach  Bible ;  you  must  prove  all  things  by  Bible ;  you 
must  talk  Bible  ;  you  must  exhort  Bible  ;  you  must  pray 
Bible,  and  love  Bible  ;  and  do  all  in  your  power  to  make 
others  love  Bible,  too.  One  great  means  to  do  good  is  to 
make  your  parishioners  sensible  that  you  are  in  earnest,  and 
fully  and  solemnly  believe  what  you  preach.  If  you  wish 
your  people  to  feel,  feel  yourself.  If  you  wish  them  to  be- 
lieve as  you  do,  show  them,  by  your  constant  assiduity  in 
teaching,  that  you  sincerely  wish  it.  You  can  do  more  good 
by  the  fire-side,  and  in  your  conference  circles,  than  in  the 
pulpit.  Pulpit  preaching  is,  and  has  long  been,  considered 
as  no  more  than  a  trade.  '  Why,  he  is  hired  to  preach  !  — 
he  must,  of  course,  tell  a  good  story,'  &c,  &c.  And  the 
very  reason  why  there  is  more  good  done  in  conference  meet- 
ings, and  protracted  meetings,  is  simply  this  :  the  god  of 
this  world  i3  shut  out.  They  will  say,  He  expects  nothing 
for  this  i  surely  our  salvation  is  his  anxious  desire.  Reflec- 
tions of  this  sort  make  strong  impressions  of  conviction  on 
the  mind.  If  this  man  of  God  will  make  so  much  sacrifice, 
surely  I  ought  to  think,  at  least,  how  much  my  brother  has 
my  benefit  in  view  in  his  preaching. 

"  May  20th.  1832.  It  is  now  almost  two  months  since 
I  began  this  letter,  and  I  ought  to  make  some  apology  for 
my  long  neglect.  But  I  hate  apologies ;  for  we  never  tell 
the  whole  truth.  You  have,  undoubtedly,  seen,  or  will  see, 
two  numbers  in  the  Telegraph  before  you  receive  this  letter. 
A  number  more  will  soon  follow.  I  expect  it  will  start  some 
queries,  if  nothing  more.  There  is  much  opposition  expressed 
by  some  who  ought  to  have  taught  the  same  things.  But 
people  will  think  and  reflect ;  and  truth  will  in  the  end  pre- 
vail. Do  come,  on  the  13th  and  14th  of  June,  to  our  Asso- 
ciation. I  expect  Bro.  Sawyer  will  be  ordained  then.  Do 
come.  I  have  much  to  say  to  you :  but  I  cannot  write  as  I 
wish 

"  I  have  just  come  from  a  prayer-meeting  this  morning, 
at  our  school-house,  at  sunrise.  We  are  praying  for  the 
second  coming  of  our  dear  Redeemer,  when  the  l  sanctuary 
will  be  cleansed.'  Pray  with  us,  my  brother.  I  am  more 
and  more  satisfied  that  the  end  of  the  world  is  at  hand.  The 
evidence  flows  in  from  every  quarter.     c  The  earth  is  reeling 


102  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

to  and  fro,  like  a  drunkard.'  One  short  year  ago,  and  Zion 
was  rejoicing  with  her  multiplied  converts ;  now  she  is  down 
£  by  the  cold  streams  of  Babylon.'  One  year  since,  and  we 
were  enjoying  a  plentiful  harvest ;  now,  we  are  sleeping  in 
the  cold,  and  the  staff  of  life  is  neglected.  Is  the  harvest 
over  and  past  ?  If  so,  soon,  very  soon,  God  will  arise  in  his 
anger,  and  the  vine  of  the  earth  will  be  reaped.  See,  see  ! 
—  the  angel  with  his  sharp  sickle  is  about  to  take  the  field  ! 
See  yonder  trembling  victim  fall  before  his  pestilential 
breath  !  High  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  trembling  and  falling 
before  the  appalling  grave,  the  dreadful  cholera.  Hark  !  — 
hear  those  dreadful  bellowings  of  the  angry  nations  !  It  is 
the  presage  of  horrid  and  terrific  war.  Look  !  —  look  again  ! 
See  crowns,  and  kings,  and  kingdoms  tumbling  to  the  dust ! 
See  lords  and  nobles,  captains  and  mighty  men,  all  arming 
for  the  bloody,  demon  fight !  See  the  carnivorous  fowls  fly 
screaming  through  the  air  !  See, —  see  these  signs  !  Be- 
hold, the  heavens  grow  black  with  clouds ;  the  sun  has  veiled 
himself;  the  moon,  pale  and  forsaken,  hangs  in  middle  air; 
the  hail  descends  ;  the  seven  thunders  utter  loud  their  voices ; 
the  lightnings  send  their  vivid  gleams  of  sulphurous  flame 
abroad ;  and  the  great  city  of  the  nations  falls  to  rise  no 
more  forever  and  forever  !  At  this  dread  moment,  look  ! 
look  !  —  0,  look  and  see  !  What  means  that  ray  of  light  ? 
The  clouds  have  burst  asunder ;  the  heavens  appear ;  the 
great  white  throne  is  in  sight !  Amazement  fills  the  uni- 
verse with  awe  !  He  comes  !  —  he  comes  !  Behold,  the 
Saviour  comes  !  Lift  up  your  heads,  ye  saints, — he  comes  ! 
he  comes  !  —  he  comes  ! 

"Wm.  Miller." 

A  letter,  written  about  the  same  time  with  the  above,  to  a 
sister  of  Mr.  Miller's,  whose  husband  was  a  Universalist,  is 
particularly  severe  on  those  sentiments.  Beginning  with 
subjects  of  mere  family  interest,  he  proceeds  to  those  of  a 
religious  ;  and,  in  speaking  of  the  nearness  of  the  advent,  he 
says  : 

"  I  now  tell  you  that  I  am  more  and  more  convinced  of 
its  truth.  I  have  lectured  on  it,  in  a  number  of  places,  this 
winter,  and  many  people  believe  that  the  calculation  is  right. 
Some  are  afraid  of  it,  and  others  will  not  believe;   but 


CORRESPONDENCE.  103 

among  them  all  it  makes  a  great  deal  of  talk.  Some  say 
Esq.  Miller  is  crazy  ;  others,  that  he  is  a  fool ;  —  and  neither 
of  them  are  wide  from  the  truth.  But  Bro.  J.  and  sister 
A.  will  say,  '  We  wish  Bro.  William  would  let  that  subject 
alone.  We  do  not  want  to  hear  so  much  about  Christ's 
second  coming,  the  end  of  the  world,  the  judgment-day,  and 
the  destruction  of  the  wicked.  He  knows  no  more  about  it 
than  the  man  in  the  moon.'  So  say  I.  But  the  Bible  tells 
us ;  and  that  will  never  fail.  You  will  see,  within  a  few 
weeks,  some  numbers  in  the  Vermont  Telegraph,  signed  W. 
M.  Read,  and  then  judge.  If  it  is  not  printed  in  the  paper, 
I  will  send  it  to  you  in  pamphlet  form.  I  think  it  will  be 
printed,  at  any  rate. 

"  I  want  to  know  if  J is  a  Universalist  yet ;  and,  if 

so,  whether  he  can  tell  me  who  are  the  partakers  of  the  sec- 
ond death,  and  what  the  second  death  is  ?  You  will  find  the 
description  of  them  in  Rev.  20th  chap.,  and  21 :  8.  Be  sure 
you  are  not  deceived,  Bro.  J. ;  for  the  time  is  shortly  com- 
ing that  will  try  every  man's  work,  whether  it  be  good  or 
evil ;  and  if  you  love  the  Lord  Jesus,  show  your  love  by 
believing  his  word,  and  being  reconciled  to  his  word  and  will. 
How  little  love  to  Christ  do  wTe  show  when  we  are  unrecon- 
ciled to  his  justice,  his  word,  or  the  righteous  judgment  of 
God  on  the  finally  impenitent !  Yes,  brother ;  it  is  not  con- 
trary to  the  carnal  mind  of  man  to  be  happy,  if  we  can  be 
happy  in  our  own  way.  Neither  should  we  be  very  angry 
with  God,  if  he  made  all  others  so,  if  we  thought  that  was 
the  only  hope  for  us.  But,  if  the  Universalists  could  con- 
trive any  plan,  that  would  be  plausible,  to  save  themselves, 
and  condemn  the  Calvinists,  or  those  who  preach  endless 
misery,  their  actions  show  that  they  would  do  it  quickly ;  or 
why  do  they  rail  at  those  wTho  preach  as  Christ  did  ?  c  Ex- 
cept a  man  is  born  again  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of 
God.'  l  And  these  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punish- 
ment.' Why  do  they  oppose  those  meetings  where  souls  are 
brought  to  cry  out,  as  in  the  days  of  the  apostles,  \  Men  and 
brethren,  what  shall  we  do  to  be  saved  'I '  Did  you  ever  hear 
such  a  cry  in  a  Universalist  meeting, —  where  brethren  and 
sisters  were  all  together  in  prayer,  with  one  accord  praying 
and  agonizing  for  the  souls  of  their  brethren  according  to  the 
flesh  ?     No ! 

10 


104  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

u  {  Do  you  think  they  are  fools.  Brother  William  ?  You 
know  they  do  not  believe  in  damnation.  They  preach  all 
me?i  will  be  saved.' 

"  Ah,  ha!  What  fools  the  apostles  were  !  If  they  had 
preached  thus  they  would  have  saved  many  a  bitter  cry ; 
and  Father  Paul  might  have  saved  himself  many  a  bitter 
groan  in  endeavoring  to  save  his  kinsmen  according  to  the 
flesh,  and  not  have  wished  himself  accursed  from  Christ  for 
their  sakes.  I  really  wish  —  if  it  is  true  that  all  men  will 
be  saved  —  that  Paul  had  known  it  before  he  made  that 
expression,  that  he  might  save  ''some?  when  he  might  have 
said  that  he  had  the  promise  of  God  that  \  alV  "would  be 
saved.  Paul  must  have  been  as  crazy  as  Bro.  William.  0, 
how  many  long  arguments  it  would  have  saved, —  how  many 
twistings  of  texts,  and  windings  and  turnings, —  if  Paul, 
Peter,  John,  Matthew,  Mark,  Luke,  Jude,  and  even  Christ, 
had  not  said  anything  about  two  classes  of  mankind  in  a 
future  state,  and  nothing  about  punishment  being  everlast- 
ing !     But  the  Universalist  is  wiser  than  all  these,  now-a- 

days ;  for  they  do  not  preach  so  now,  do  they,  J ? 

"Wm.  Miller. 

"  March  27,  1832." 

During  the  summer  of  1832,  Mr.  Miller  appears  to  have 
been  much  engaged  in  attending  protracted  meetings,  which 
were  at  that  time  very  common  in  many  parts  of  the  coun- 
try. Under  date  of  "Hampton,  Oct.  1,  1832,'*  he  wrote  to 
Elder  Hendryx : 

".'•.-.  When  your  letter  arrived  I  was  attending  a 
protracted  meeting,  in  Westport ;  and  the  next  day  after  I 
got  home  I  went  to  Poultney,  to  attend  one  there.  I  went 
to  Keesville,  to  attend  one,  as  soon  as  we  left  Poultney,  and 

only  arrived  home  last  Saturday I  have  spent  a 

great  share  of  my  time  in  attending  protracted  meetings  this 
summer  and  fall." 

In  the  same  letter  he  thus  exhibits  his  fondness  for  the 
Bible,  and  points  out  the  great  doctrines  which  he  believed 
it  inculcated  : 

"  I  want  to  see  you  more  than  ever,  and  when  we  have 
less  company,  so  that  we  can  sit  down  and  have  a  good  dish 
of  Bible  together.     The  light  is  continually  breaking  in  ; 


CORRESPONDENCE.  105 

and  I  am  more  and  more  confirmed  in  those  things  of  which 
I  told  you,  namely,  redemption  by  grace ;  the  efficacy  of 
Christ's  blood  ;  justification  by  his  righteousness  imputed  to 
us  ;  sanctification  through  the  operation  of  the  Divine  Spirit ; 
and  glorification  by  our  gathering  together  unto  him  at  his 
appearing.  I  also  believe  those  things  to  be  founded  upon 
election,  particular,  personal,  and  certain ;  governed  by  the 
mind,  will,  and  plan  of  God,  which  was,  is,  and  will  be  eter- 
nal ;  and  which  is  revealed  to  us  so  far  as  to  give  us  confi- 
dence, hope,  and  full  assurance  that  nothing  in  the  Divine 
plan,  either  of  the  means  or  end,  can  or  will  fail  of  their 
accomplishment. " 

The  church  in  Low  Hampton  being  destitute  of  a  pastor,  in 
a  letter  to  the  same,  dated  Nov.  17,  1832,  Mr.  Miller  de- 
scribes the  kind  of  minister  they  wished  for. 

11  We  do  not  want  one  who  thinks  much  of  his  own  gifts, 
and  is  lifted  up  with  pride;  neither  do  we  want  a 
novice  —  I  mean,  a  fool ;  one  who  knows  nothing  about  the 
Gospel  of  Christ.  We  want  one  who  will  stir  up  our  minds, 
will  visit,  is  good  to  learn,  apt  to  teach,  modest,  unassuming, 
pious,  devotional,  and  faithful  to  his  calling.  If  his  natural 
talents  are  brilliant,  with  those  qualifications,  they  would  not 
hurt  him.  If  they  are  only  moderate,  they  may  do  wrell 
enough  for  us.  Some  of  our  people  want  '  a  quick  gab.' 
But  I  should  prefer  a  quick  understanding.  .  .  I  set  out 
for  Salem  to-morrow  morning." 

In  a  letter  to  the  same,  dated  Hampton,  Feb.  8, 1833,  he 
writes :  "  The  Lord  is  scattering  the  seed.  I  can  now 
reckon  eight  ministers  *  who  preach  this  doctrine,  more  or 
less,  besides  yourself.  I  know  of  more  than  one  hundred 
private  brethren  who  say  that  they  have  adopted  my  views. 
Be  that  as  it  may,  '  truth  is  mighty  and  will  prevail.'  If 
I  should  get  my  views  printed,  how  many  can  you  dispose  of, 
in  pamphlet  form  ]  .  .  Our  people  are  about  giving  me  a 
license  to  lecture.  I  hardly  know  what  to  do.  I  am  too  old, 
too  wicked,  and  too  proud.  I  want  your  advice.  Be  plain, 
and  tell  me  the  whole  truth." 


*  The  first  minister  who  publicly  adopted  his  views,  was  Elder  Fuller, 
ofPoultney,  Vt. 


106  LIIE    01    WILLIAM    MILLER. 

Shortly  after,  he  published  his  views,  in  a  pamphlet  of 
sixty-four  pages,  entitled  : 

••  Evidences  from  Scripture  and  History  of  the  Second 
Corning  of  Christ,  about  the  year  1843  :  and  of  his  Personal 
Reign  of  One  Thousand  Years.  By  'William  Miller.  '  Prove 
all  things:  hold  fast  that  which  is  good.'*  1  Th.  5:  21. 
Brandon.  Vermont.  Telegraph  Office.  1833.''" 

Soon  after  the  publication  of  this  pamphlet,  he  had  occa- 
sion to  visit  the  city  of  New  York.  As  he  was  passing  down 
the  Hudson,  in  a  steamboat,  a  company  of  men  standing 
near  him  were  conversing  respecting  the  wonderful  im- 
provements of  the  day.  One  of  them  remarked,  that  it  was 
impossible  for  things  to  progress,  for  thirty  years  to  come,  in 
the  same  ratio  as  they  had  done:  "for/"  said  he.  "man 
will  attain  to  something  more  than  human.'"  Mr.  Miller 
replied  to  him.  that  it  reminded  him  of  Dan.  12:  4, —  "Many 
shall  run  to  and  fro.  and  knowledge  shall  be  increased/'" 
A  pause  ensuing.  Mr.  M.  continued,  and  observed,  that  the 
improvements  of  the  present  day  were  just  what  we  should 
expect  at  this  time,  in  the  fulfilment  of  Daniel's  prophecy. 
He  then  commenced  with  the  11th  chapter  of  Daniel,  and, 
comparing  the  prophecy  with  the  history,  showed  its  fulfil- 
ment —  all  listening  with  close  attention. 

He  then  remarked,  that  he  had  not  intended  trespassing 
so  long  on  their  patience,  and.  leaving  them,  walked  to  the 
other  end  of  the  boat.  The  entire  company  followed,  and 
wished  to  hear  more  on  the  subject.  He  then  took  up  the 
2d.  7th.  8th  and  9th  chapters  of  Daniel.  His  hearers  wished 
to  know  if  he  had  ever  written  on  the  subject.  He  told  them 
that  he  had  published  the  above  pamphlet,  and  distributed 
among  them  what  copies  he  had  with  him. 

This  was  one  of  his  first  audiences,  and  some  gentlemen 
of  high  standing  listened  to  his  remarks. 

He  scattered  the  most  of  his  pamphlets  gratuitously,  send- 
ing them  as  a  response  to  letters  of  inquiry  respecting  his 
views,  and  to  places  which  he  could  not  visit. 

Under  date  of  April  10.  1833.  in  writing  to  Elder  Hen- 
dryx.  and  speaking  of  the  evil  of  resorting  to  excommunica- 
tion from  the  church  for  slight  causes,  in  view  of  a  particu- 
lar case,  he  says  :  ••  Is  the  remedy  better  than  the  disease  ? 
Should  we  cut  off  a  man's  leg  because  he  has  a  thorn  in  his 


CORRESPONDENCE.  107 

toe  ?  I  think  not.  Should  we  set  a  wheat  field  on  fire  and 
burn  the  whole  crop,  because  of  a  few  tares  in  the  field  ? 
No;  let  both  grow  until  the  harvest.  0,  how  much  in- 
jury is  done  in  church  discipline!  The  hypocrite  uses  it 
as  a  tool  to  make  others  think  he  is  very  pious.  The  envious 
use  it  as  a  weapon  to  bring  down  those  they  imagine  are 
getting  above  them.  The  bigot  uses  it  to  bring  others  to  his 
faith  :  and  the  sectarian,  to  bring  others  to  his  creed,  &c. 
But,  my  dear  brother,  how  many  difficulties  do  you  think  we 
have  in  our  churches  where  the  spirit  of  Christ  is  manifested 
through  the  whole  trial,  or  where  it  began  with  c  Father, 
forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do '  ?  Therefore, 
I  can  frankly  and  honestly  say,  the  remedy  which  has  been 
applied  to  cure  this  moral  disease,  is  worse,  a  thousand  times 
worse,  than  the  original  cause. " 

In  the  same  letter,  he  says:  "  We  have  no  preacher,  as 
yet,  except  the  old  man  [Mr.  M.]  with  his  Concordance. 
And  he  is  so  shunned,  with  his  cold,  dull  and  lifeless  per- 
formance, that  I  have  strong  doubts  whether  he  will  attempt 
again.     But — hush  — not  a  word  of  what  I  tell  you !     I  had 

a  letter  from  brother  S ,  a  few  days  since.     He  wants 

me  to  go  down  and  spend  a  few  days  in  lecturing  on  the 
prophecies  with  his  folks  [in  Jay,  N.  Y.]  But  the  cross! 
....  Last  Sunday,  in  the  P.  M.,  I  tried  to  hold  forth 
the  truth  from  Isa.  65  :  25 ;  the  Sabbath  before,  from  the 
same  chapter,  17 — 19  verses.  I  wish  I  had  the  tongue  of 
an  Apollos,  and  the  mental  powers  of  a  Paul :  what  a  field 
might  I  not  explore  ;  and  what  powerful  arguments  might 
be  brought  to  prove  the  authenticity  of  the  Scriptures !  But 
I  want  one  thing  more  than  either  —  the  spirit  of  Christ  and 
of  God  :  for  he  is  able  to  take  worms  and  thresh  mountains. 
0  my  brother,  let  us  pray  for  each  other,  especially  on  the 
Sabbath,  each  that  the  Lord  would  bestow  this  gift  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  upon  the  other.  Peradventure  the  Lord  will 
answer.'" 

In  the  same  letter  he  thus  expresses  his  regard  for  the 
word  of  God  : 

'  •  0  may  the  Bible  be  to  us  a  rock,  a  pillar,  a  compass,  a 

chart,  a  statute,  a  directory,  a  polar  star,  a  traveller's  guide, 

a  pilgrim's  companion,  a  shield  of  faith,  a  ground  of  hope,  a 

history,  a  chronology,  an  armory,  a  store-house, 

10* 


103  LIFE    01   WILLIAM  MILLER. 

toilet,  a  closet,  a  prayer-book,  an  epistle,  a  love  letter,  a 
friend,  a  foe.  a  revenue,  a  treasury,  a  bank,  a  fountain,  a  cis- 
tern, a  garden,  a  lodge,  a  field,  a  haven,  a  sun.  a  moon,  a 
star,  a  door,  a  window,  a  light,  a  lamp,  a  luminary,  a  morning. 
a  noon,  an  evening,  an  hour-glass,  a  daysman,  a  servant, 
an  handmaid. 

■•It  is  meat.  food,  drink,  raiment,  shelter,  warmth,  heat,  a 
feast,  fruit,  apples,  pictures,  wine.  milk,  honey,  bread,  but- 
ter, oil.  refreshment,  rest,  strength,  stability,  wisdom,  life. 
eyes.  ears,  hands,  feet,  breath  ;  it  is  a  help  to  hearing,  seeing, 
feeling,  tasting,  smelling,  understanding,  forgiving,  loving. 
hoping,  enjoying,  adoring,  and  saving:  it  teaches  salvation, 
justification,  sanetification.  redemption,  and  glorification  :  it 
declares  condemnation,  destruction,  and  desolation :  it  tells  us 
what  we  were.  are.  and  shall  be  :  begins  vrith  the  beginning, 
carries  us  through  the  intermediate,  and  ends  only  with  the 
end:  it  is  past,  present,  and  to  come  :  it  discovers  the  first  great 
cause,  the  cause  of  all  effects,  and  the  effects  of  ail  causes:  it 
speaks  of  life,  death,  and  judgment,  body.  soul,  and  spirit. 
heaven,  earth,  and  hell :  it  makes  use  of  all  nature  as  fig- 
ures, to  sum  up  the  value  of  the  gospel :  and  declares  itself 
to  be  the  Word  of  God.  And  your  friend  and  brother 
believes  it.  William  Miller. 

'-'-Hampton.  April  10th.  1833." 


CHAPTER    VI  I. 

BECOMES     A     LICENSED     PREACHER  —  VISITS     DIFFERENT     PLACES 

LETTER     ON     UNIVERSALIS}! —  POETICAL    LETTER    TO    ELDER    HEN- 
DRYX RECORD    OF  EIS    LABORS  —  SKETCH  OF  A  DISCOURSE,  ETC 

In  the  autumn  of  this  year.  Mr.  Miller  received  a  license 
to  preach,  from  the  church  of  which  he  was  a  member,  as 

follows : 

"  Let  brotherly  love  continue  :  the  Baptist  Church  of 
Christ,  in  Hampton  and  "Whitehall,  do  certify  that  Brother 
William  Miller  is  a  member  in  regular  standing  in  this 
Church.  Brother  Miller  has  been  improving  his  gifts  with  us 
in  expounding  the  words  of  Divine  Truth,  in  public,  for  some 


BECOMES   A   LICENSED    PREACHER.  109 

time  past,  to  the  approbation  and  edification  of  the  church. 
We  are  satisfied  that  Brother  Miller  has  a  gift  to  improve  in 
public  ;  and  are  willing  he  should  improve  the  same,  wher- 
ever his  lot  may  be  cast  among  the  Zion  of  God,  —  that  the 
name  of  the  Lord  may  be  glorified,  and  his  followers  edified. 
Done  in  Church  Meeting,  Saturday,  Sept.  14,  1833.  By 
order  of  the  Church. 

"  (Signed,)        Byron  S.  Harlow,  Clerk  pro  temP 

In  a  letter  to  his  sister,  before  referred  to,  written  two 
days  subsequent  to  the  date  of  the  above,  and  dated  "  Low 
Hampton,  Sept.  16,  1833,"  he  speaks  of  the  above  license, 
and  of  his  labors,  as  follows  : 

;*  I  have  just  returned  from  Dresden,  where  I  have  been 
to  spend  a  Sabbath,  and  to  preach  to  them  the  word  of  life. 
My  texts,  yesterday,  were  Hosea  13  :  1 ;  Isa.  61 :  7  ;  and 
Psa.  102  :  16.  ...  I  do  feel  anxious  to  come  and  see  you; 
and,  if  the  Lord  will,  and  your  people  should  not  object,  to 
try  to  speak  to  them  of  the  things  of  the  kingdom.  My 
brethren  have  given  me  a  license  —  unworthy  and  old  and 
disobedient  as  I  am.     Oh,  to  grace  how  great  a  debtor  !  " 

He  then  proceeds  with  matters  of  mere  family  interests ; 
and  closes  with  the  following  exhortation  to  his  brother-in- 
law,  respecting  the  doctrine  of  Universalism  : 

"  Just  as  sure  as  the  word  of  God  is  true,  depend  upon 
it,  universal  salvation  is  not  true.  "Was  this  what  David 
saw,  when  he  saw  the  end  of  the  wicked  2  Enter  into  the 
sanctuary  of  your  own  conscience,  my  brother,  and  you  will 
find  c  no  '  responded  with  appalling  force.  Enter  into  the 
sanctuary  of  God's  word,  and,  in  every  page,  you  will  have 
to  meet  this  little  word  l  Is  0/  or  declarations  as  plain. 
'  Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate ;  for  many  shall  strive 
to  enter  in,  and  shall  not  be  able.'  Look  at  Daniel  12  : 
9,  10  :  — here  we  have  the  end  described.  What  does  con- 
science say?  Be  careful,  my  brother;  remember  that 
eternal  consequences  hang  on  your  decision ;  and  what  is  the 
answer  1  '  Many  (not  all)  shall  be  purified,  and  made  white, 
and  tried ;  but  the  wicked  shall  do  wickedly ;  and  none  of 
the  wicked  shall  understand.'  See  Malachi  4 :  1 — 3. 
Where  are  the  wicked,  the  proud,  and  all  that  do  wickedly  ? 
Do  they  enjoy  the  healing  beams  of  the  Sun  of  righteousness  2 


110  LIFE    OP   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

'  No.5  Again,  in  Matthew  18  :  49.  50.  Are  the  wicked 
permitted  to  dwell  with  the  just  ]  Is  heaven  and  happiness 
their  abode )  Enter  into  the  sanctuary,  and  what  do  you 
hear  ?  No !  No !  Again,  in  Matthew  25  :  12.  30,  and 
46.  Do  the  foolish  virgins  enter  in  to  the  marriage  supper  ? 
or  are  they  ever  married  to  the  Lamb  ?  No  !  Is  the  unprof- 
itable servant  ''in  light  and  glory]'  No!  No  !  And 
are  the  goats  enjoying  the  same  communion  with  the  sheep  ? 
or  are  they  going  { into  life  eternal  ?-  *  No  !  No  !  NO  ! 
Read,  again.  Rom.  1 :  18.  to  the  fifth  verse  of  the  second 
chapter.  Would  it  be  unjust  for  God  to  condemn  the  charac- 
ters there  described  ?  Your  judgment  tells  you  No.  Your 
conscience  responds  the  same  answer.  No !  Your  tongue 
must  one  day  answer  NO  !  For  every  tongue  must  and 
will  confess  to  the  glory  of  God.  Oh  !  my  brother,  enter 
into  the  sanctuary,  and  knock  while  the  door  may  be  opened  ; 
seek  while  you  may  find  :  look  while  you  may  live ;  and  you 
will  most  assuredly  learn  ''their  end.'  All  the  plausible 
reasoning  of  all  the  Universalists  under  the  whole  canopy  of 
heaven,  cannot  save  one  soul.  •'  Except  a  man  is  born  of 
the  Spirit  he  cannot  enter  the  kingdom  of  God."  " 

During  the  fall  of  1833.  and  the  ensuing  winter.  Mr. 
Miller  seems  to  have  been  constantly  occupied  in  lecturing 
in  Dresden  and  other  towns  in  New  York  and  Vermont. 
The  very  modest  estimate  which  he  had  of  his  own  abilities 
and  qualifications  as  a  preacher,  is  apparent  in  all  his  corres- 
pondence where  any  reference  is  made  to  his  public  labors. 
In  writing  to  Eld.  Hendrvx.  under  date  of  Low  Hampton, 
Feb.  25th,  1834,  he  says : 

"  .  .  You  have  undoubtedly  heard  that  I  have  been  try- 
ing to  preach  (as  some  call  it)  about  in  this  vicinity.  I  have 
been  laboring,  it  is  true,  in  my  weak  manner,  in  Dresden,  two 
or  three  months :  and  the  Lord  has  seen  fit  to  bless  us  with 
a  little  reformation.  I  have  likewise  preached  in  Putnam, 
Wrentham,  Poultney.  and  in  this  place.  You  laugh.  Bro. 
Hendrvx.  to  think  old  Bro.  Miller  is  preaching  !  But  laugh 
on :  you  are  not  the  only  one  that  laughs :  and  it  is  all 
right  —  I  deserve  it.  If  I  could  preach  the  truth,  it  is  all  I 
could  ask." 

Being  now  recognized  as  a  regularly  licensed  preacher. 
his  Bro.  Hendryx  naturally  addressed   him  as  the  "Rev. 


CORRESPONDENCE.  Ill 

William  Miller."  To  a  letter  thus  directed,  Mr.  Miller, 
under  date  of  "  Hampton,  March  22,  1834,"  thus  replied: 

u  Dear  Bro.  Hendryx  :  —  I  wish  you  would  look  into 
your  Bible,  and  see  if  you  can  find  the  word  Rev.  applied  to  a 
sinful  mortal  like  myself;  and  govern  yourself  accordingly. 

Let   us   be   determined  to  live    and    die 

on  the  Bible.  God  is  about  to  rise  and  punish  the  inhabit- 
ants of  the  world.  The  proud,  the  high,  the  lofty  must  be 
brought  low ;  and  the  humble,  the  meek,  and  the  contrite 
will  be  exalted.  Then,  what  care  I  for  what  the  world  calls 
great  or  honorable?  Give  me  Jesus,  and  a  knowledge  of  his 
word,  faith  in  his  name,  hope  in  his  grace,  interest  in  his  love, 
and  let  me  be  clothed  in  his  righteousness,  and  the  world  may 
enjoy  all  the  high-sounding  titles,  the  riches  it  can  boast,  the 
vanities  it  is  heir  to,  and  all  the  pleasures  of  sin ;  and  they 
will  be  no  more  than  a  drop  in  the  ocean.  Yes,  let  me  have 
Jesus  Christ,  and  then  vanish  all  earthly  toys.  What  glory 
has  God  revealed  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ !  In  him  all 
power  centres.  In  him  all  power  dwells.  He  is  the  evi- 
dence of  all  truth,  the  fountain  of  all  mercy,  the  giver  of 
all  grace,  the  object  of  all  adoration,  and  the  source  of  all 
light ;  and  I  hope  to  enjoy  him  to  all  eternity.  What ! 
such  a  sinful  wretch  as  I  enjoy  Christ  ?  How  can  this  be  1 
Yes,  yes;  through  the  electing  love  of  God,  the  sprink- 
ling of  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  and  the  work  of  regenera- 
tion, such  a  sinner  as  I  may  be  cleansed  from  sin,  purified, 
and  made  white,  and  glorified  in  the  New  Jerusalem,  to- 
gether with  him,  and  with  all  who  love  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ,  and  who  love  his  appearing.  Bro.  H.,  shall 
you  and  I  appear  together  in  that  general  assembly  and 
church  of  the  first  born  ?  If  God  will,  I  hope  we  shall  there 
meet,  to  part  no  more.  How  can  I  realize  the  glory  that 
will  there  be  manifested  ?  And  how  could  I  bear  the  thought 
to  be  banished  from  the  face  of  Jesus,  and  from  the  glory  of 
his  power  ?  Forbid  it,  0  my  Redeemer  !  Forbid  !  and  let 
grace  reign  through  righteousness  unto  eternal  life,  by  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord." 

The  same  devotional  feelings  are  manifest  in  all  his  epis- 
tles, and  also  evince  that  he  experienced  nearness  of  access 
to  God,  and  great  religious  enjoyment. 


112  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

Many  of  his  unstudied  letters  contain  sentiments  poetically- 
expressed.  Some  of  these  have  been  given  in  the  preceding 
pages.  The  following  one  contains  so  full  a  synopsis  of  his 
views,  that  it  is  here  inserted  entire  : 

"  North  Hampton,  August  17,  1834. 

"  Dear  Brother  Hendryx  :  — Your  favor  of  last  month 
was  duly  received.  I  have  delayed  writing,  for  fear  my  letter 
would  arrive  at  Locke  before  you.  Since  I  saw  you,  I  have 
been  on  a  tour  north.  I  was  gone  from  home  twenty-eight 
days,  and  delivered  thirty-two  lectures  on  the  second  coming 
of  our  dear  Redeemer  and  his  personal  reign,  as  follows  :  — 
two  at  Keene,  nine  at  Jay,  (there  a  reformation  broke  out 
while  I  was  lecturing,  and  Brother  Sawyer  writes  me  that  it 
is  still  progressing,  and  that  about  eighty  have  been  the 
fruits  thus  far),  seven  at  a  place  called  the  Forks  (here  three 
were  converted  before  I  left,  and  eight  or  ten  were  under 
conviction,  not  heard  from  since),  nine  at  Keesville  (a  great 
concourse  of  people,  spent  two  Sabbaths  and  one  week,  some 
Universalists  shaken),  five  at  Peru  Village  (large  audience, 
and  some  conversions  — one  strong  Universalist).  I  have 
spent  a  few  Sabbaths  in  this  vicinity ;  but  shall  take  another 
tour  next  week. 

"How  thankful,  Brother  Hendryx,  we  ought  to  be,  that 
God  can  and  does  make  use  of  feeble,  frail,  broken  instru- 
ments, for  the  salvation  of  immortal  souls  !  Yes,  thanks  be 
to  God  !  Let  all  glory  belong  to  him.  I  have  had  invitations 
from  twelve  other  places  to  visit  them  and  lecture  on  the 
same  subject.  After  haying  and  harvesting  are  over,  I  shall 
go  again.  If  I  am  correct,  how  important  is  time  !  Nine 
years  will  pass  soon ;  and  then,  my  dear  brother,  you  and 
I  must  render  our  account  before  the  solemn  bar  of  our 
omnipotent  Judge. 

c  Come,  come,  dear  Saviour,  nor  let  time  delay  !  .    .    .  Rev.  22  :  17,  20. 
Break,  sacred  morning  !  usher  in  the  day,   .....  Isa.   58  :  8. 
When  all  the  happy  throng,  the  heavenly  band,   .    .    .  Dan.  7  :  10. 
Shall  descend  from  above,  6  the  spirit  land;  '      ...  1  Thess.  4  :  14. 
When  the  seventh  trump  its  solemn  blast  shall  sound,         "       «*    16. 
And  Gabriel's  voice  shall  shake  the  solid  ground;    .    .  Isa.  2  :  19,  21. 
When  sleeping  myriads  from  their  graves  shall  rise,   .  1  Thess.  4  :  16. 
And  meet  thee,  Jesus,  in  these  nether  skies ;    ....       "         "17. 
When  those  who  yet  remain,  by  sin  oppressed,    ...       "         "     " 
Will  feel  a  sudden  change  and  join  the  blessed.  .   .   .  1  Cor.  15: 51, 52. 


POETICAL    LETTER. 


113 


.    .  Acts  1  : 

9,11 

.    .  Rev.  1  : 

7. 

.    .  Isa.  27 

13. 

.    .  Psa.  18 

:  7. 

.    .  Rev.  20 

:  11. 

.    .Mai.  4: 

1. 

cc        cc 

<( 

cc       cc 

cc 

.Rev.  19 

:  18. 

cc         cc 

17. 

en,  Dan.  2  : 

44. 

IC          cc 

35. 

.    .Rev.  19: 

20. 

.    .    "   20  : 

10. 

.    .  Isa.  24  : 

23. 

a       cc 

20. 

There  all  the  Spirit's  fruits  unite  to  praise    ....  Gal.  6  :  8. 
The  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit  —  *  Ancient  of  days.'      .  Dan.  7  :  9,  22. 

"  Yes,  my  brother,  if  we  are  found  looking,  longing  and 
believing,  happy  will  that  meeting  be.  '  Blessed  and  holy  is 
he  that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection,'  &c.  But  if,  on 
the  contrary,  we  are  hypocrites,  what  a  sad  scene,  what  a 
dismal  morning  to  us  ! 

"  When  from  the  East  we  see  the  cloud  arise,      .    . 
And  bring  to  view  a  Saviour  long  despised,     .    . 
W^hen  we  shall  hear  the  trump's  portentous  roll, 
That  shakes  the  earth  from  centre  to  the  pole ;     . 
When,  from  the  great  white  throne,  indignant  ire 
Shoots  forth  its  blaze,  and  sets  the  world  on  fire  : 
Then  all  the  wicked,  all  that  pride  can  boast, 
8  Shall  be  as  stubbble,'  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  ; 
When  kings,  and  captains,  tyrants,  mighty  men, 
Are  the  great  supper  for  the  fowls  of  heaven ; 
And  kingdoms,  thrones,  and  powers,  dominions  riven 
Like  chaff  before  the  angry  whirlwind  driven, 
The  dragon,  papal  beast,  the  great  arch-foe, 
Shall  sink  in  endless  night,  —  eternal  woe ; 
The  orb  of  day,  his  face  be  hid  in  gloom,  .    . 
And  the  old  reeling  earth  in  Nature's  tomb.     . 

"But  we,  my  brother,  if  we  are  what  we  profess  to  be, 
look  for  a  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,  wherein  dwell- 
eth  righteousness. 

"  When  this  dark  orb  shall  from  its  ashes  rise,  .  #. 
And  the  new  heavens,  descending  from  the  skies, 
The  bride,  adorned  in  robes  of  righteousness, 
Shall  with  the  Bridegroom  enter  into  rest.  .  .  . 
Then,  O  my  soul,  shall  you,  permitted,  view  .  . 
The  word  fulfilled  :  '  created  all  things  new; '  .  . 
And  all  be  banished  —  trials,  sins  and  fears,  .  . 
To  live  and.  reign  with  Christ  a  thousand  years.  . 
The  beloved  city,  filled  with  boys  and  men,       .    . 

Will  constitute  the  New  Jerusalem, 

And  there,  as  priests  of  God.  with  Christ  to  dwell, 
While  Satan  and  his  hosts  are  chained  in  hell. 

But,  lo  !  a  thousand  years  are  past  and  gone, 
Since  the  new  world  was  from  the  old  one  born ;  . 
WThen  death  gives  up  the  particles  of  dust,     .    .    . 
And  hell  lets  loose  the  spirits  of  the  curs'd.     .    . 
Then  on  the  surface  of  the  earth  they  stand,     . 

A  company  unnumbered  as  the  sand ; 

For  in  the  flesh  they  sinned  in  time  that's  pass'd. 
So  in  the  flesh  must  they  be  judg'd  at  last  ;  .  . 
Deceived  and  gathered,  round  the  city  come,  .  . 
To  hear  their  sentence  and  receive  their  doom.    . 


Isa.  65  : 

17. 

Rev.  21 : 

10. 

cc        cc 

2. 

He.  4  :  9 

Psa.  130 

:  5— i 

Rev.  21  : 

5. 

cc        cc 

4. 

"     20: 

6. 

Zech.  8  : 

4,5. 

cc         cc 

3,  8. 

Rev.  20  : 

6. 

CC        CC      1 

—3. 

CC        CC      *7 

Isa.  42  : 

5— & 

Rev.  20  : 

13. 

cc       cc 

13. 

cc       cc 

9. 

cc       cc 

8. 

Rom.  7  : 

5. 

1  Pet.  4  : 

6. 

Rev.  20  : 

8. 

13. 


114  LIFE    OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

But  can  they  scale  those  walls,  so  great  and  high  ?  Rev.  21  :  22. 
No;  nothing  enters  that  doth  make  a  lie.   ...      "      "      27. 
Now  from  the  golden  gates,  from  tower  to  tower,      "     "      12 — 18. 
The  saints  look  forth  for  the  decisive  hour  !    .    .    1  Co.  6  :  2.  Rev.  14:  7. 
Then  justice,  from  on  high,  in  fiery  breath,     .    .    Dan.  9  :  3.  He.  12  :  29. 
Destroys  the  rebels  —  this  '  the  second  death  ! ' .   Rev.  20  :  9, 14;  21 : 8. 

"But  stop;  what  am  I  about  ?  Writing  poetry,  when  I 
ought  to  have  been  writing  sober  prose  !  for  I  am  almost  cer- 
tain I  shall  never  see  you  again,  until  the  morning  of  that 
day  comes,  '  and  the  Sun  of  righteousness  arises.'  — 
Mai.  4  :  2. 

"  With  healing  wings  shall  grace  on  grace  distil,  .  Zech.  4  :  7. 
And  cleanse  the  church  on  Zion's  holy  hill ;  .  .  Dan.  8  :  14. 
Where  sin  no  more  controls,  nor  death  by  sin,    .  Rom.  5  :  12 — 21. 

But  justified  and  glorified  with  him  : "      8  :  30 — 39. 

No  need  of  sun  or  moon,  for  He  's  our  light ;   .    .  Rev.  21  :  23. 
No  changing  seasons  there,  nor  gloomy  night;    .    "     22  :  5. 
No  parting  there  of  friends,  nor  farewells  given,  Rom.  8  :  35 — 39. 
But  gathered  all  in  one  from  earth  and  heaven.  Eph.  1 :  10. 
On  this  my  faith  is  fixed,  my  hope  is  rais'd  ;    .  1  Cor.  13  :  13. 
To  him  the  glory,  and  his  name  be  prais'd.    .    .  Psa.  148. 
Then,  while  I  stay  in  this  unfriendly  state,    .    .  1  Cor.  15  :  9. 
Lord,  give  me  grace,  and  patiently  I  '11  wait.  .    .  Rom.  5  :  4,5. 

"  Poetry  again  !  Indeed,  Brother  Hendryx,  you  must  for- 
give me,  for  my  x  pen  refuses  to  write  anything  except  it 
hobbles  along  in  verse  ;  and  this  may  be  wholly  uninterest- 
ing to  you. 

"  For  poets  say,  and  surely  they  can  tell,   ....  Sol.  Song  1  :  7. 
To  read  a  poet  right,  '  drink  from  his  well ;'      .    "5:1.  Acts  8  :  29. 
To  catch  the  spirit,  touch  the  spirit's  flame,     .    .  1  Jn.  4  : 1.  Rom.  8  :  9. 

And  kindred  spirits  kindle  back  again 1  Tim.  4 :  12. 

Then  read  my  quotings,  brother,  and  believe,      .  2  Cor.  1  :  12 — 14. 

If  I  'm  not  right,  I  'm  happy  being  deceived;   .    .  Gal.  6  :  3,  4. 

For  hope  's  an  anchor,  —  all  in  this  agree, —  .    .  Heb.  6  :  19. 

And  faith  a  helmsman  —  so  at  least  with  me  ;    .2  Cor.  5  :  7. 

The  word  of  God  my  compass,  love  the  pole,    .    .  Rev.  15:2.  Isa.  60  :  9. 

Experience  my  sails,  and  Christ  the  whole.     .    .  Eze.  27  :  7. 

Grace  is  my  ballast,  for  it  keeps  me  low;    .    .    .  Rom.  7  :  7 — 25. 

The  Spirit  is  the  wind,  that  bears  me  through  ;  .  Sol.  S.  4  :  16.  Acts  2: 2. 

Perfection  is  the  haven  for  which  I  run,  ....  Ephe.  4  :  13. 

Consigned  to  him  who  gave  for  me  his  Son  ;    .    .  1  Co.  15  :  24.  Jn.  3: 16. 

Life  is  the  voyage,  and  I  am ( homeward  bound,'    Jer.  45  :  5. 

Time  is  my  log-book,  death  my  anchor-ground  ;  Rev.  2: 10.  Ps,  116: 15. 

The  resurrection  is  my  ship  o'erhauled,    .    .    .     "    20:6.  Ps.  17  :15« 

Eternity  unites  us  all  in  all 1  Co.  15  :  28. 


PLACE. 

TIME. 

Forks,  N.  Y. 

Oct.  1,  1834. 

Keesville,  N.  Y. 

"     5,      " 

Beekmantown, 

"     6,      " 

Plattsburgh, 
Keesville, 

"    8,      " 
™  11,      « 

a 

"  12,      « 

Westport, 
<« 

"  14,      " 
"  15,      « 

CORRESPONDENCE.  115 

11  And  now.  surely,  brother,  your  patience  will  be  relieved  ; 
for  my  paper  is  filled  up,  and  I  can  only  say,  my  respects  to 
all  you  and  yours.     Mrs.  Miller  sends  hers  also. 

"  I  remain  your  brother  in  the  Gospel, 

"  William  Miller. 

Mr.  Miller  kept  no  journal,  nor  any  record  of  the  places 
he  visited,  till  October,  1834.  Beginning  at  a  place  called 
" The  Forks/'  supposed  to  be  "  Moore's  Forks''  in  Clinton 
county,  N,  Y.,  the  names  of  places  where,  the  dates  when, 
and  the  texts  from  which,  he  preached,  are  given  in  two 
small  memorandum-books,  as  follows  : 


Luke  15  :  18.  Rev.  8  :  13. 

Rev.  1  :  20.  Job  23  :  24. 

Dan.  8:  13,  14.  "  10:  14. 

Dan.  8  :  13,  14.  Rev.  20  :  6. 
1  Cor.  3  :  11. 

Rom.  8:  6,  7.  Luke  15  :  18. 

Dan.  8  :  13, 14.  "  10  :  14. 
Rew  20  :  6. 

After  visiting  the  above  places,  he  returned  home  to  Low 
Hampton,  and  soon  after  wrote  to  Elder  Hendryx,  as  follows  : 

"  North  Hampton,*  Oct.  23,  1834. 

"My  dear  Brother  Hendryx  :  —  Your  favor  of 
Sept.  17  came  to  hand  while  I  was  absent  on  a  tour  into 
Clinton  county,  of  about  six  weeks.  I  gave  thirty-six  lec- 
tures on  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ,  was  at  two  cov- 
enant meetings,  attended  two  protracted  meetings  in  said 
time,  saw  a  number  of  new-born  babes  in  Christ ;  and  now, 
being  at  home,  I  shall  write  to  Brother  H.  and  rest  myself 
a  little 

"  You  ask  me  to  give  you  a  skeleton  of  some  discourse. 
My  last  was  from  Rom.  8:6.     And, 

"I.  I  show  the  exercise  of  the  carnal  mind. 

"II.  I  show  the  exercise  of  the  spiritual  mind. 

"  III.  Explain  Death,  Life  and  Peace. 

"  How  I  treated  my  first  and  second  heads  you  well  know. 

*  The  north  part  of  Hampton  is  called  Low  or  North  Hampton,  to  dis- 
tinguish it  from  the  main  part  of  the  town 

li 


116  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER, 

c;  III.  Death  is  a  separation. 

"  1st.  Natural  death  is  a  separation  of  soul  and  body. 
All  mankind  are  its  subjects.  It  is  not  the  penalty  of  the 
law :  for  Christ  became  the  end  of  the  law  for  us.  &e. 

11  2d.  Death  moral  is  a  separation  from  holiness  and 
happiness.  All  men  were  under  this  death  by  reason  of 
sin.  This  is  the  penalty  —  and  Christ  bore  this  in  his  own 
body  on  the  tree,  when  he  cried.  *  My  God.  my  God.'"  fcc. 
This  death  is  eternal  unless  we  are  delivered  by  some  power 
that  can  give  life.  And  we  must  be  born  of  the  Spirit,  or 
be  morally  dead  forever. 

"  3d.  Death  spiritual  is  a  separation  from  piety,  or  from 
spiritual  life  :  and  none  but  those  who  have  been  born  of 
the  Spirit  can  become  subjects  of  this  death,  and  those  only 
while  in  the  body.  '  absent  from  the  Lord/'     2d  Cor.  1  :   9. 

''Life  is  the  opposite  of  Death  :  and  is  natural,  moral 
and  spiritual.  Natural  life  is  animal,  and  may  and  doth 
exist  in  transgressors  of  the  holy  law  of  God.  This  all  men 
have  and  will  possess,  both  before  and  after  the  resurrection. 
Moral  life  is  that  life  enjoyed  by  all  perfectly  holy  beings. 
as  the  holy  angels,  man  in  his  original  state,  and  the  church 
of  the  First-born  made  perfect.  It  is  God  with  us.  saints 
glorified,  &c.  Spiritual  life  is  the  life  enjoyed  by  spiritual 
men  ;  those  who  live  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit ; 
those  who  are  born  of  the  spiritual  man.  the  Lord  from 
heaven.  This  is  more  or  less  enjoyed  by  the  Christian  in  this 
imperfect  state,  is  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  and  is  manifested 
by  love,  faith  and  hope,  and  all  the  graces  of  the  Spirit. 
These  are  the  spiritual  seed,  children  of  the  promise  :  which 
have  the  promise  not  only  of  this  (spiritual)  life,  but  of 
that  (moral  life)  which  is  to  come,  which  is  eternal,  out  of 
the  reach  of  sin  or  temptation. 

'"  Peace  is  that  holv  exercise  of  love  to  God  and  man. 
which  constitutes  the  happiness  of  all  souls  reconciled  to  the 
government  of  God ;  makes  them  at  peace  with  God.  witn 
man.  and  their  own  conscience,  and  gives  a  taste  of  heaven, 
happiness,  and  the  world  to  come. 

"  I  am  every  day  more  convinced  that  the  whole  word  of 
God  is  given  for  our  instruction,  reproof  and  correction  ; 
and  that  the  prophecies  contain  the  strongest  evidences  of 
the  divinity  and  truth  of  the  Bible  :  and  present  to  saint  and 


CORRESPONDENCE.  117 

sinner  the  strongest  motives  for  a  holy  life,  and  repentance 
and  faith  towards  God,  that  can  be  produced.  When  John 
preached  repentance,  he  prophesied  that  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  was  at  hand,  as  a  principal  motive.  The  apostles 
prophesied  that  God  had  appointed  a  day,  in  which  he  would 
judge  the  world  in  righteousness,  by  that  man,  Jesus  Christ ; 
and  your  unworthy  brother  in  Christ  proclaims  that  the  day 
is  at  hand,  when  l  he  that  is  filthy  will  be  filthy  still,  and 
he  that  is  holy  will  be  holy  still '  ;  and  that  Christ  is  now 
standing  at  the  door  and  knocking  for  the  last  time.  And, 
my  dear  brother,  I  can  truly  say  '  that  the  testimony  of 
Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy.'  And  yet  how  many  pro- 
fessed ministers  of  Christ,  at  the  present  day,  treat  that  part 
of  the  word  with  total  neglect,  and  even  laugh  and  jeer  at 
those  who  would  warn  the  people  of  their  approaching  danger. 
But  God  has  supported  me  beyond  my  most  sanguine  expec- 
tation. And  although  they  say  much  before  they  hear,  yet 
when  they  do  hear  they  seem  confounded. 

"  The  evidence  is  so  clear,  the  testimony  is  so  strong,  that 
we  live  on  the  eve  of  the  present  dispensation,  towards  the 
dawn  of  the  Glorious  Day,  that  I  wonder  why  ministers 
and  people  do  not  wake  up  and  trim  their  lamps.  Yes,  my 
brother,  almost  two  years  since  you  heard  the  news,  i  Behold, 
the  bridegroom  comet h  V — and  yet  you  cry,  A  little  more 
sleep,  a  little  more  slumber.  Blame  not  your  people  if  they 
go  to  sleep  under  your  preaching.  You  have  done  the  same. 
Bear  with  me,  my  brother.  In  every  letter  you  have  writ- 
ten me,  you  have  promised  to  study  this  all-important  sub- 
ject, and  in  every  letter  you  confess  your  negligence.  The 
day  draws  near.  More  than  one  sixth  of  the  time  is  gone 
since  my  Brother  Hendryx  promised,  and  yet  asleep  !  Oh  ! 
God,  forgive  him  !  Are  you  waiting  for  all  the  world  to 
wake  up  before  you  dare  get  up  ?  '  Where  has  your  cour- 
age fled  ? '  AwTake  !  awake  !  0  sluggard  !  Defend  your 
own  castle,  or  take  sides  with  the  word  of  God  ;  destroy,  or 
build.  You  must  not,  you  cannot,  you  shall  not  be  neutral. 
Awake !  awake !  Tell  Deacon  Smith  to  help  wake  you. 
Tell  him,  for  me.  to  shake  you,  and  not  give  out  shaking, 
until  Bro.  H.  will  put  on  the  whole  armor  of  light. 

11  In  every  church  where  I  have  lectured  on  this  important 
subject,  many,  very  many,  seem  to  awake,  rub  open  their 


118  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

eyes,  and  then  fall  back  to  sleep  again.  But  the  enemy  is 
waking  up.  In  one  town  (North  Beekmantown)  I  received 
a  letter,  the  day  after  my  first  lecture,  from  some  bullies 
and  blackguards,  '  that  if  I  did  not  clear  out  of  the  state, 
they  would  put  me  where  the  dogs  could  never  find  me.'  The 
letter  was  signed  by  ten  of  them.  I  staid,  and,  blessed  be 
God  !  he  poured  out  his  Spirit,  and  began  a  work  which  gain- 
sayers  could  not  resist. 

"  Some  ministers  try  to  persuade  their  people  not  to  hear 
me  ;  but  the  people  will  go,  and  every  additional  lecture  will 
bring  an  additional  multitude,  until  their  meeting-houses 
cannot  hold  them.  Depend  upon  it,  my  brother,  God  is  in 
this  thing  ;  and  he  will  be  glorified ;  and  blessed  be  his  holy 
name  !  Do  pray  for  me,  my  brother,  that  I  may  have  grace 
equal  to  my  need,  and  that  I  may  always  see  my  need,  feel 
my  weakness,  and  be  kept  humble,  and  that  I  may  always 
declare  the  truth.     Do  pray  ! 

"  I  think,  if  the  Lord  will,  I  shall  be  in  your  section  of 
country  next  spring  or  summer.     Do  give  me  a  list  of  some 
brethren  between  here  and  your  place,  if  you  can. 
u  I  remain  yours  in  Christ, 
Rev.  T.  Hekdryx.  "  William  Miller." 

Two  days  subsequent  to  the  date  of  the  above,  Mr.  M. 
was  again  in  the  field ;  and,  according  to  his  memorandum- 
book,  gave  lectures  as  follows  :  Oct.  25  and  26,  at  Paulet, 
Vt.  ;  Nov.  6,  8  and  9,  at  Orwell,  Vt.  ;  10  and  12,  in  Corn- 
wall, Vt. ;  and  Nov.  16,  in  Hampton,  N.  Y.  His  success 
in  the  above  places  is  indicated  in  the  following  extract  from 
a  letter  which  he  wrote  Elder  Hendryx  from  Low  Hampton, 
on  the  28th  of  Nov.,  1834: 

"  I  have  had  good  success  since  I  wrote  you  before.  The 
Lord  has  been  with  me.  I  have  been  into  a  number  of 
towns  in  Vermont.  Some  old,  hardened  rebels  have  been 
brought  to  plead  for  mercy,  even  before  my  course  of  lec- 
tures was  finished.  Blessed  be  the  holy  name  of  God !  He 
has  given  me  more  than  I  should  have  dared  to  ask.  How 
good,  my  brother,  it  is  to  preach,  having  God  for  paymas- 
ter !  He  pays  down.  He  pays  in  souls.  He  paid  the  Shep- 
herd thus,  and  he  wTas  satisfied  :  will  he  not  pay  his  servants 
too  1  Yes,  yes.  Bless  his  name,  0  my  soul,  for  all  his 
benefits ! 


NEW   DOOIIS   OPEN.  119 

11 1  find  that  studious  Christians  are  the  best  hearers; 
and  the  reason  is  obvious.  The  more  we  know  of  mankind, 
the  less  room  there  is  for  bigotry,  superstition,  and  prejudice. 
Those  are  evils  always  attending  ignorance." 

With  the  exception  of  a  single  Sabbath  in  Orwell,  Vt., 
Mr.  Miller  remained  at  home  during  the  remainder  of  the 
year. 


CHAPTER    VIII. 

NEW    DOORS    OPEN HIS    LABORS    COUNTENANCED    BY    MINISTERS    OP 

HIS    DENOMINATION HIS    FIRST    DONATION     OF    TWO    HALF-DOL- 
LARS   DEATH    OF    HIS     MOTHER INCIDENT    AT    SHAFTSBURY 

RESULTS   OF    HIS    LABORS TESTIMONY    OF    A    CONVERT    FROM    IN- 
FIDELITY—LETTER    OF     REV.     C.     FITCH URGENT    APPEALS    TO 

VISIT    VARIOUS    TOWNS,  &C. 

After  the  commencement  of  the  new  year  (1835)  he  lec- 
tured, during  the  first  week  of  January,  in  Addison,  Vt.,  and 
the  second  in  Cornwall,  Vt.  He  then  returned  home,  where 
he  remained  till  the  12th  of  February,  writing  on  the  11th 
to  Elder  Hendryx  as  follows : 

"  The  Lord  opens  doors  faster  than  I  can  fill  them.  To- 
morrow I  have  an  appointment  in  Whiting,  which  will  oc- 
cupy a  week.  The  next  week  I  shall  be  in  Shoreham  ;  the 
last  week  in  this  month,  at  Bridgport ;  the  first  week  in 
March,  in  Middletown  ;  the  second,  in  Hoosac.  I  have  calls 
from  Schroon,  Ticonderoga,  Moriah,  Essex,  Chazy,  Cham- 
plain,  Plattsburgh,  Peru,  Mooretown,  Canton,  Pottsdam, 
Hopkinton,  Stockholm,  Parishyille,  and  other  places  too  nu- 
merous to  mention.  The  Lord  has  blessed  me  thus  far ;  in 
almost  every  place  where  I  have  lectured,  the  Spirit  has 
given  fruit.  Where  I  went  forth  expecting  trials  and  per- 
secution, I  have  found  God  a  present  help.  Pray  for  me, 
that  my  faith  fail  not,  and  that  I  may  ever  feel  my  weak- 
ness, and  that  my  dependence  may  be  on  Israel's  God. 
Pray  that  I  may  do  my  duty  in  the  fear  of  God,  and  in  the 
11* 


120  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM   MILLER. 

love  of  the  truth  :  and  then,  whatever  mav  become  of  me. 
God  will  be  glorified  and  souls  saved.'" 

After  filling  the  two  former  of  those  appointments,  he 
returned  home  till  the  Sth  of  March,  when  he  lectured  in 
Bridgport.  Vt..  three  days,  and  gave  six  lectures.  He  lec- 
tured in  Granville  on  the  following  Sabbath.  March  loth. 
and  again  returned  home. 

It  s-ems  to  have  been  his  intention,  when  he  left  home 
on  the  Tth  of  March,  to  have  returned  to  Whiting  —  he 
having  received  an  invitation  to  that  effect.  A  powerful 
work  of  grace  had  followed  his  lectures  there,  and  several  in- 
fidels  had  acknowledged  the  authenticity  of  the  Scriptures  as 
demonstrated  by  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  and  were  under 
deep  conviction,  and  wished  to  see  him.  Whether  he  went 
there  or  not.  does  not  appear.  But.  on  the  -1st  of  M: 
he  writes.  •■  I  have  been  very  sick  with  a  cold,  for  a  icy  or 
two  past,  and  I  am  only  able  to  sit  up  for  a  short  tin 

On  the  19th  of  April  he  aorain  visited  Granville,  where 
he  also  lectured  on  the  20th  and  21st.  On  the  20th.  he  lec- 
tured at  Middletowm  IN.  Y.  On  the  -Sth.  he  again  wrote 
from  Low  Hampton. 

•   I  have  been  laid  up  with  a  s-:"~er:    ::la    :a  :;: 

only  to  two  or  three  places  since  I  wrote  last  March  21st). 
But  I  have  now  recovered  my  health  again,  so  that  I 
been  the  last  two  weeks  at  Granville  and  Middletown.  Xext 
Sunday  (May  3)  I  am  to  be  at  Fort  Ann  Village.  US.  Y.. 
if  the  Lord  will :  and  when  I  shall  get  through  lecturing  in 
this  region.  I  cannot  tell.  Doors  open  faster  than  I  can  fill 
them.  I  have  calls  from  Wells.  Bishop's  Corner,  and  Tin- 
mouth." 

These  lectures  and  sermons  of  Mr.  Miller  me:  aoval 

of  a  large  number  of  the  mini-teas  of  his  denomination,  with 
whose  approbation,  from  this  time,  he  went  forth  as  a  public 
laborer,  endorsed  and  sanctioned  by  the  following  certificate  : 

"March  19,  In:  J. 

••  This   may  certify,  to  whom   it   may  concern,   that  we. 
whose  names  are  hereunto  affixed. —  being  ministers  in  the 
denomination  of  regular  Baptists.  —  are  personally  acquai 
with  Bro.  William  Miller,  the  bearer  of  this  certificate  :  that 
he  is  a  member,  and  a  licentiate  in  good  regular  standing,  in 


CERTIFICATES.  121 

tlie  particular  Baptist  church,  in  Hampton,  N.  Y. ;  that  we 
have  heard  his  lectures  on  the  subject  of  the  Second  Com- 
ing and  Reign  of  onr  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  that  we 
believe  his  views  on  that  particular  subject,  as  well  as  others 
pertaining  to  the  gospel,  arc  worthy  to  be  known  and  read 
of  all  men.  As  such  an  one,  we  commend  him  to  God,  and 
the  affectionate  acceptance  of  our  brethren  in  the  precious 
Saviour. 

J.  Sawyer,  Jr.,  South  Reading. 

E.  Halping,  Hampton. 

Amos  Stearns,  Fort  Ann. 

Emerson  Andrews,  Lansingburgh. 


"  June  28,  1836. 
"  Having  heard  the  .  above-mentioned  lectures,  I  see  no 
way  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that  the  coming  of  Christ  will  be 
as  soon  as  1843. 

R.  S.  Palmer,  Stockholm,  N.  Y. 

Joel  H.  Green,  Parishville. 

Silas  Pratt.  Nicholsville. 

Wareham  Walker,  Shaftsbury,  Vt. 

Edw.  B.  Crandell,  Lansingburgh,  N.  Y. 

James  Ten  Brooke,  Panton,  Vt. 

Edward  Mitchell,  Canada. 

Samuel  B.  Ryder,  Jr.,  Canada. 

S.  C.  Dillaway,  West  Granville,  N.  Y. 

Wakeman  G.  Johnson,  Whiting,  Vt. 

B.  Carpenter,  Addison. 

J.  Fuller,  Poultney. 

Holland  Turner,  Plattsburg. 

A.  Jones,  Jr.,  Middlebury. 

Anthony-  Case,  Cornwall. 

Albert  Stone,  Johnston. 

Prosper  Powell,  Troy,  Vt. 

Samuel  Marshall,  Fort  Ann,  N.  Y. 

Isaac  Wescott,  Stillwater. 

William  W.  Moor,  Bristol. 

Edward  S.  Soullard,  Middletown. 


122  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

"  I  do  cordially  recommend  the  above,  and  its  bearer, 
Brother  Miller. 

George  Norris,  Granville. 

Jehial  K.  Wright,  Weybridge. 

M.  D.  Miller,  Monkton. 

Simon  Fletcher,  Bridgeport,  Vt. 

John  A  Dodge,  Ferrisburg. 

Elias  Hurlbut,  Andover,  Vt. 

Samuel  Pollard,  Weston,   " 

Edmund  Goodnough,  Agent  B.  G.  T.  S. 

Arurah  Allen,  West  Haven. 

Hiram  Safford,  Keeseville. 

Friend  Blood,  Brookfield. 

Benjamin  Willard,  East  Williamstown. 

Lyman  Culver,  Barre. 

Isaiah  Huntley,  Jericho. 

John  Lord,  East  Randolph,  Mass. 

James  M.  Beeman,  Westford,  Vt. 

Oliver  Ayer,  Littleton,  Mass." 


"  The  above  I  certify  to  be  a  true  copy  of  an  original 
Ministerial  Recommendation,  signed  by  the  above-named 
persons.  The  sentiments  I  believe  correct,  and  according  to 
the  word  of  God.  I  think  it  will  be  fulfilled  in  1843,  or 
thereabouts. 

Justus  Da  Lee,  Cambridge.7' 

After  visiting  Fort  Ann,  N.  Y.,  on  the  3d  of  May,  he 
lectured  in  Whitehall,  N.  Y.,  on  the  10th  and  17th  of  the 
same  month ;  in  West  Haven,  on  the  7th  of  June,  and  in 
Middlebury,  Vt.,  on  the  14th.  From  that  place  he  went 
into  the  province  of  Lower  Canada,  and  lectured,  on  the  21st 
and  23d,  at  Bolton ;  the  25th,  at  Hutting ;  the  28th,  29th, 
and  July  1st,  at  Derby ;  July  2d,  at  Georgeville ;  the  5th 
and  6th,  at  Bolton,  again ;  the  7th,  at  Outlet ;  and  the  8th 
and  9th  at  Stanstead  Plain.  On  the  12th,  he  lectured  at 
Derby,  Vt. ;  the  13th,  at  Troy,  Vt. ;  the  14th,  at  Lowell, 
Vt. ;  the  15th,  at  Eden,  Vt. ;  the  16th,  at  Cambridge,  Vt. ; 
the  17th,  at  Jericho,  Vt. ;  and  the  19th,  at  Orwell,  Vt. 

During  this  tour,  while  in  Canada,  a  woman  placed  two 
half-dollars  in  his  hand3  which  was  all  the  assistance  he  re- 


DEATH    OF   HIS   MOTHER.  123 

ceived  previous  to  1836.  His  expenses  for  travel,  &c.,  were 
paid  from  his  own  funds. 

On  his  way  home  from  Canada,  he  was  much  depressed  in 
his  spirits.  To  use  his  own  words,  he  was  overwhelmed  wTith 
a  dark  cloud,  for  which  he  could  not  account.  He  felt  im- 
pelled to  hasten  home,  with  a  presentiment  that  there  was 
trouble  there.  Leaving  Jericho,  Vt,  instead  of  filling  sev- 
eral appointments,  he  took  the  nearest  route,  and  hastened 
home  wTith  all  speed.  Calling  at  Orwell,  by  the  urgent 
request  of  his  Uncle  Phelps,  he  stopped  to  speak  to  the 
church  on  the  Sabbath,  leaving  immediately  after  service  for 
home,  where  he  arrived  late  at  night.  His  family  were 
astonished  to  see  him  return  so  soon,  and  he  was  delighted 
to  find  them  all  well. 

At  an  early  hour  on  Monday  he  went  to  visit  his  mother, 
to  take  to  her  a  present  from  her  daughter  in  Canada.  His 
mother  lived  about  half  a  mile  from  Mr.  Miller's,  with  her 
son,  Solomon.  He  found  her  in  the  enjoyment  of  good 
health,  and  he  spent  the  day  with  her,  returning  home 
unusually  interested  with  his  visit.  His  mother  did  not 
receive  his  views,  but  always  told  him  to  preach  the  whole 
truth,  as  he  believed  it,  and  do  his  duty.  Soon  after  Mr. 
Miller  had  left  his  mother  she  was  seized  with  the  palsy. 
Mr.  M.  was  sent  for.  She  was  unable  to  converse  any; 
but,  by  the  pressure  of  the  hand,  signified  that  she  knew 
him,  and  before  the  close  of  the  week  expired.  Had  not 
Mr.  Miller  been  impressed  with  a  sense  of  "trouble  at 
home,'7  he  would  have  taken  a  more  circuitous  route,  and 
filled  several  appointments,  according  to  previous  arrange- 
ments. By  thus  changing  his  original  purpose  he  enjoyed 
the  opportunity  of  a  day's  conversation  with  his  mother, 
which  he  would  otherwise  have  been  deprived  of.  He  often 
recurred  to  this  as  a  signal  instance  of  God's  favor. 

On  the  2d  of  August,  he  lectured  at  South  Bay,  N.  Y.  ; 
on  the  9th,  at  Dresden,  N.  Y. ;  and,  on  the  23d,  at  South 
Bay,  again.  On  the  28th,  he  again  writes  from  Low  Hamp- 
ton, to  Elder  Hendryx,  as  follows  : 

"  I  am  yet  engaged  in  warning  the  inhabitants  to  be  pre- 
pared for  the  great  day  of  God  Almighty,  and  am  endeavor- 
ing to  prove  by  the  Scriptures  that  it  is  near,  even  at  the 


124  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

doors I  always  present  this  as  an  inducement  for 

men  to  repent.  I  call  on  them  in  the  name  of  my  dear 
Master  to  turn,  repent,  believe,  and  obey  him.  I  beseech 
them,  for  the  value  of  their  souls,  to  believe  in  Christ.  I 
implore  them  to  lay  up  treasures  in  heaven.  I  importune 
with  them,  again  and  again,  to  read,  reflect,  examine,  and 
see  if  the  word  of  God  is  not  true.  I  show  them  its  com- 
plete fulfilment  thus  far,  and  then  I  pray  God  to  direct  the 
arrow  to  the  heart.  I  ask  God,  through  Jesus  Christ,  to 
nerve  the  arm  that  pulls  the  bow,  and  to  sharpen  the  arrow 
that  twangs  from  it.  I  then  put  all  my  confidence  in  God, 
and  in  his  promise,  '  Lo,  I  am  with  you  even  to  the  end  of 
the  world.'     .     .     . 

"  I  have  this  moment  received  a  letter  from  Bro.  Wescott 
[the  Baptist  clergyman],  to  be  in  Stillwater  next  Sabbath 
[August  30th] ;  and  I  shall  be  under  the  necessity  of  leav- 
ing in  a  few  minutes.  I  shall  be  absent  until  about  the  1st 
of  October. 

"My  good  old  mother  Miller  is  dead.  She  died  about 
four  weeks  since.     The  rest  of  us  are  all  in  good  health. 

"  Yours  in  gospel  bonds.  Wm.  Miller.  " 

He  visited  Stillwater,  N.  Y.,  according  to  invitation,  and 
continued  there  one  week,  lecturing  each  day.  On  the 
13th  he  was  at  Bristol.  On  the  1st  of  November  he 
visited  Middletown,  N.  Y.,  and  gave  a  course  of  eight  lec- 
tures. He  then  lectured  again,  five  days,  at  Bristol,  com- 
mencing on  the  15th  of  November ;  and,  beginning  on  the 
29th,  he  labored  five  days  longer  at  Middletown, —  usually 
giving  two  lectures  each  day.  On  the  6th  of  December  he 
was  at  Whitehall,  N.  Y. ;  on  the  20th,  at  Poultney,  Vt. ; 
and  on  the  27th,  at  Westhaven.  This  terminated  his  labors 
for  the  year  1835. 

On  the  3d  of  January,  1836,  he  lectured  at  a  "  Brother 
Aborn's;"  on  the  24th,  at  Dresden,  N.  Y. ;  on  the  7th  of 
February,  at  Fort  Ann  Village,  N.  Y. ;  on  the  13th  of 
March,  at  Orwell,  Vt. ;  and  on  the  14th,  at  Shoreham,  Vt. 
His  public  lectures  during  these  winter  months  were  inter- 
rupted by  the  preparation  of  his  course  of  sixteen  lectures 
for  the  press,  which  were  published  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  in  the 
spring  of  this  year,  by  Elder  Wescott.     All  the  copies  of 


CORRESPONDENCE.  1 25 

that  edition  supplied  to  Mr.  Miller  he  purchased  at  the 
regular  prices. 

On  the  24th  of  April  he  again  visited  Stillwater,  N.  Y.  ; 
and,  on  the  15th  of  May,  New  Haven,  Vt.  On  the  16th,  he 
commenced  a  course  of  lectures  at  Weybridge,  Vt.,  which 
closed  on  the  20th.  On  the  day  following,  he  began  his 
labors  at  Monkton,  N.  Y.,  which  continued  eight  days. 

On  the  19th  of  June  he  visited  Lansingburgh,  N.  Y.,  and 
continued  till  the  26th.  To  pay  his  stage-fare  he  received, 
on  this  occasion,  four  dollars,  which,  with  the  two  half-dol- 
lars received  in  Canada,  was  all  the  remuneration  he  had 
thus  far  received  for  his  expenses.  Subsequent  to  that  time, 
as  he  says  in  his  "  Apology  and  Defence,"  he  never  received 
enough  to  meet  his  expenses  of  travel  to  the  places  where  he 
was  invited  ;  so  that  his  public  labors  were  never  of  any 
pecuniary  advantage  to  him,  as  has  been  currently  reported 
and  believed ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  they  were  a  heavy  tax 
on  his  property,  which  gradually  decreased  during  that 
period  of  his  life. 

On  the  21st  of  July,  he  writes,  from  Low  Hampton,  to 
Elder  Hendryx :  —  "I  have  been  confined  at  home,  for  three 
weeks  past,  by  a  bilious  complaint.  I  was  taken  mrwell 
while  lecturing  at  Lansingburgh,  N.  Y. ;  but  I  finished  my 
course  of  lectures,  and  returned  home,  and  have  not  been 
well  since.  My  lectures  were  well  received  in  that  place, 
and  excited  attention.  The  house  was  filled  to  overflowing 
for  eight  days  in  succession.  I  feel  that  God  was  there,  and 
believe  that  in  his  glorified  kingdom  I  shall  see  the  fruits. 

Infidels,  Deists,  Universalists  and  sectarians, 

were  all  chained  to  their  seats,  in  perfect  silence,  for  hours, 
—  yes,  days, —  to  hear  the  old  stammering  man  talk  about 
the  second  coming  of  Christ,  -and  show  the  manner,  object, 
time,  and  signs  of  his  coming.  0,  my  brother  !  it  makes  me 
feel  like  a  worm, —  a  poor,  feeble  creature:  for  it  is  God 
only  who  could  produce  such  an  effect  on  such  audiences. 
Yet  it  gives  me  confidence ;  for  I  solemnly  believe  it  is 
truth ;  and  God  will  support  his  word,  and  will  be  present 
where  it  is  preached,  howTever  feeble  the  instrument ;  for  '  Lo, 
I  am  with  you  even  to  the  end  of  the  world.'  Therefore,  if 
I  were  preaching  before  all  the  kings  of  the  earth,  why 
should  I  fear  ?  for  the  King  of  kings  is  with  me.     If  all  the 


126  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

lords  were  there,  yet  He  is  Lord  of  lords,  and  of  the  great 
men  of  the  earth." 

Mr.  Miller  again  lectured  in  Dresden,  N.  Y.,  on  the  7th 
of  August;  in  Orwell,  Vt,  on  the  11th  of  September;  and 
in  Keesville,  N.  Y.  on  the  18th.  He  then  gave  courses 
of  lectures,  beginning  at  Lawrence,  N.  Y.,  on  the  22d; 
Stockholm,  on  the  29th  ;  Parishville,  on  the  7th  of  October ; 
Massena,  N.  Y.,  on  the  14th.  He  gave  ten  lectures  at 
Fort  Covington,  N.  Y.,  beginning  on  the  20th,  and  was  at 
Chatauguay,  N.  Y.,  on  the  27th.  This  terminated  his 
labors  for  the  year  1836.  In  allusion  to  these  last  visits, 
he  wrote  on  the  23d  of  December : 

"  I  have  not  visited  a  place  where  the  Lord  has  not  given 
me  one  or  two  souls  for  my  hire.  I  have  spent  eight  weeks 
in  St.  Lawrence  county,  and  delivered  eighty-two  lectures 
this  fall.  Next  week  I  am  going  to  Shaftsbury  and  vicin- 
ity." 

He  visited  Shaftsbury,  Vt.,  the  23d  of  January,  1837, 
and  gave  his  full  course  of  sixteen  lectures.  At  the  close 
of  one  lecture,  a  Baptist  clergyman  arose,  and  stated  that  he 
had  come  there  for  the  purpose  of  exposing  the  folly  of 
Mr.  M.,  but  had  to  confess  that  he  was  confounded,  con- 
victed and  converted.  He  acknowledged  that  he  had  ap- 
plied various  unhandsome  appellations  to  Mr.  Miller,  calling 
him  "the  end  of  the  world  man,'7  "the  old  visionary,'' 
"dreamer,"  "fanatic,''  and  for  which  he  felt  covered  with 
shame  and  confusion.  That  confession,  evidently  so  honest, 
was  like  a  thunderbolt  on  the  audience. 

Very  few  particulars  of  interest  have  been  gathered  re- 
specting his  labors  during  the  year  1837.  According  to  his 
memorandum-book,  he  lectured  in  Wells,  Vt.,  on  the  3d  of 
February;  in  Shrewsbury,  Vt.,  on  the  3d  of  March:  in 
Andover,  Vt.,  from  the  5th  to  the  12th  of  March :  in  Wes- 
ton, Vt.,  four  days,  beginning  with  the  13th:  in  Mt.  Holly, 
Vt.,  on  the  17th ;  in  Orwell,  Vt.,  on  the  23d  of  April  and 
7th  of  May  ;  in  Danby,  Vt,,  on  the  14th  of  May  ;  in  Poult- 
ney,  Vt,,  eight  days,  beginning  with  the  21st  of  May  ;  in  Or- 
well, again,  on  the  4th  of  June;  in  North  Springfield,  Vt., 
from  the  11th  to  the  17th  ;  in  Ludlow,  Vt.,  from  the  19th 
to  the  21st;  in  Mt.  Holly,  Vt.,  from  the  25th  of  June  to 


TESTIMONY  FROM  AN  INFIDEL.  127 

the  2d  of  July;*  in  Orwell,  Vt,  on  the  9th  of  July;  at 
Fairhaven,  Vt.,  from  the  11th  to  the  20th  ;  in  Whiting, 
Vt,  on  the  23d ;  in  Fairhaven,  Vt.,  on  the  13th  of  Aug.  ; 
in  Moriah,  Vt,,  from  the  14th  to  the  22d  of  October;  in 
Ludlow,  Vt..  from  the  29th  to  the  6th  of  November,  and  at 
Stillwater,  N.  Y.,  on  the  31st  of  December. 

With  the  1st  of  January,  1838,  he  commenced  a  second 
course  of  lectures  at  Lansingburgh,  N.  Y.,  in  compliance  with 
the  urgent  request  of  the  Baptist  church  in  that  place,  and 
of  E.  B.  Crandall,  their  pastor.  The  lectures  continued 
nine  days,  and  were  listened  to  by  crowded  and  attentive  au- 
diences. The  result  also  was  most  heart-cheering.  Infidelity 
had  several  strongholds  in  that  neighborhood,  and  many  of 
that  class  attended  his  lectures,  and  were  greatly  affected  by 
them.  In  a  letter  dated  on  the  25th  of  that  month,  two 
weeks  after  the  close  of  the  lectures,  a  gentleman  of  that 
place  writes  to  Mr.  Miller : 

"  I  have  never  witnessed  so  powerful  an  effect  in  any 
place,  as  in  this,  on  all  who  heard.  I  am  of  the  opinion 
that  not  less  than  one  hundred  persons,  who  held  infidel  sen- 
timents, are  brought  to  believe  the  Bible.  Infidelity  is 
dumb  in  this  place,  as  if  frightened,  and  converts  are  many." 

The  following  testimony  of  one  who  was  converted  from 
infidelity  during  these  lectures,  is  copied  from  the  Boston 
Investigator  (an  infidel  paper)  of  January,  1845. 

"  Mr.  Editor  :  —  I  was  a  warm  supporter  of  the  views 
of  Abner  Kneeland,  attended  his  lectures  and  protracted 
dances,  disbelieved  in  Divine  Revelation  and  a  future  exist- 
ence, and  fully  accorded  with  Mr.  Kneeland' s  views  of  re- 
ligion. Having  read  every  work  of  note  that  I  could  obtain, 
and  having  heard  many  lectures  opposed  to  God  and  the 
Bible,  I  considered  myself  prepared  to  overthrow  the  Chris- 
tian faith,  and  feared  no  argument  that  could  be  brought 
from  the  Bible.  With  these  feelings,  I  attended  a  full 
course  of  Mr.  Miller's  lectures.  He  gave  his  rules  of  inter- 
pretation, and  pledged  himself  to  prove  his  position.  I  ap- 
proved of  his  rules,  — to  which  I  refer  you,  — and  the  result 

*  At  this  place  they  raised,  and  placed  in  his  hands,  quite  a  sum  of 
money  for  his  services.  He  took  $1.50  to  pay  his  stage  fare  to  the  next 
place,  and  directed  them  to  give  the  balance  to  some  benevolent  object. 

12 


128  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

was,  he  established  the  fact  that  the  Bible  is  what  it  purports 
to  be  —  the  Word  of  God  —  to  my  mind,  beyond  a  doubt ;  and 
I  have  taken  it  as  the  man  of  my  counsel.  I  notice  your 
doubts  of  the  truth  of  the  statement  in  relation  to  hundreds 
of  infidels  being  converted  under  the  preaching  of  Mr.  Mil- 
ler. This  may  possibly  be  owing  to  your  never  having  given 
Mr.  Miller  a  candid  and  thorough  hearing.  He  is  a  man 
mighty  in  the  Scriptures,  and  has  done  terrible  execution  in 
the  ranks  of  the  i  King's  enemies,'  with  the  sword  of  the 
Spirit,  which  is  the  Word  of  God.  I  am  personally  ac- 
quainted with  nearly  "one  hundred,  who  held  to  similar  views 
with  Abner  Kneeland,  who  were  converted  under  the  preach- 
ing of  Mr.  Miller  ;  and  we  did  not  yield  the  point  without  a 
struggle,  nor  without  due  consideration.  Each  and  every 
prop  and  refuge  of  infidelity  and  unbelief  were  taken  away 
from  us,  and  our  sandy  foundation  was  swept  by  the  truth 
of  the  Almighty  as  chaff  is  driven  by  the  wind.  Yet  we 
parted  with  them  much  as  a  man  parts  with  a  diseased  tooth. 
We  tried  to  cure  and  keep  it  there,  and  when  made  to  know 
that  the  root  and  foundation  was  rotten,  it  was  painful  to  part 
wTith  ;  but  we  rejoiced  and  felt  better  after  the  separation  ; 
for  there  is  balm  in  Gilead  —  there  is  a  Physician  there. 
"  Lansingbargh,  N.  Y.,  January,  1845." 

On  the  14th  of  January,  Mr.  Miller  lectured  at  West- 
haven,  N.  Y.,  and  two  weeks  from  that  day  at  Low  Hamp- 
ton, N.  Y.  On  the  4th  of  February  he  commenced  a  course 
of  lectures  at  Panton,  Vt,  which  he  continued  eight  days. 
He  then  returned  to  Westhaven,  N.  Y.,  and  lectured  seven 
days,  beginning  February  18th. 

On  returning  to  Low  Hampton,  he  found  the  following  let- 
ter from  Rev.  Charles  Fitch,  pastor  at  the  Marlboro'  Chapel, 
Boston.  It  was  the  beginning  of  an  acquaintance  between 
those  dear  brethren  in  Christ,  and  as  such  will  be  read  with 

interest  by  all. 

"  Boston,  March  5,  1838. 

"  My  dear  Brother  :  — I  am  a  stranger  to  you,  but  I 
trust  that,  through  the  free  sovereign  grace  of  God,  I  am  not 
altogether  a  stranger  to  Jesus  Christ,  whom  you  serve.  I  am 
the  pastor  of  an  Orthodox  Congregational  church  in  this  city. 
A  few  wTeeks  since  your  lectures  on  the  Second  Coming  of 
Christ  were  put  into  my  hands.     I  sat  down  to  read  the 


LETTER   OF   REV.    C.    FITCII.  129 

"work,  knowing  nothing  of  the  views  which  it  contained.  I 
have  studied  it  with  an  overwhelming  interest,  such  as  I 
never  felt  in  any  other  book  except  the  Bible.  I  have  com- 
pared it  with  Scripture  and  history,  and  I  find  nothing  on 
which  to  rest  a  single  doubt  respecting  the  correctness  of 
your  views.  Though  a  miserable,  guilty  sinner,  I  trust  that, 
through  the  Lord's  abounding  grace,  I  shall  be  among  those 
that  •  love  his  appearing.'  I  preached  to  my  people  two 
discourses  yesterday  on  the  coming  of  our  Lord,  and  I  be- 
lieve a  deep  and  permanent  interest  will  be  awakened  thereby 
in  God's  testimonies.  My  object  in  writing  you,  my  dear 
sir,  is  twofold. 

Cl  1st.  Will  you  have  the  kindness  to  inform  me,  by  letter, 
in  what  history  you  find  the  fact  stated  that  the  last  of  the 
ten  kings  was  baptized  A.  D.  508,  and  also  that  the  decree 
of  Justinian,  giving  the  Bishop  of  Rome  power  to  suppress 
the  reading  of  the  Scriptures,  was  issued  in  538  ?  All  the 
other  data  which  you  have  given  I  have  found  correct,  and 
I  know  of  no  reason  to  doubt  your  correctness  in  these. 
But,  as  I  have  not  yet  been  able  to  find  a  statement  of  those 
facts,  you  will  do  me  a  great  favor  by  just  informing  me 
where  I  may  find  them  ;  and  I  shall  then  feel  prepared  to 
defend  the  truth,  and  to  point  others  to  the  right  source  of 
information. 

"  There  is  a  meeting  of  our  Ministerial  Association  to-mor- 
row, and,  as  I  am  appointed  to  read  an  essay,  I  design  to 
bring  up  this  whole  subject  for  discussion,  and  trust  that  I 
may  thereby  do  something  to  spread  the  truth. 

"  2d.  My  second  object  in  writing  was  to  ask  if  you  would 
put  me  in  the  way  to  obtain  a  dozen  copies  of  your  lectures. 
I  know  of  none  to  be  obtained  here.  I  know  of  several  indi- 
viduals who  are  very  desirous  'to  obtain  the  work,  and  if  you 
can  tell  me  of  any  place  where  it  can  be  obtained  in  this  city, 
or  in  New  York,  you  will  greatly  oblige  me.  If  you  can 
give  me  any  information  of  importance  on  the  subject,  not 
contained  in  your  book,  I  should  greatly  rejoice,  because,  as 
I  stand  a  watchman  on  the  walls,  I  wish  to  l  give  the 
trumpet  a  certain  sound  J  and  to  make  that  sound  as  full, 
and  explicit,  and  convincing  as  possible. 

"  Yours  in  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ, 

11  Charles  Fitch.  ° 


130  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

On  the  12th  of  March,  Mr.  M.  commenced  a  course  of  lec- 
tures, and  continued  eight  days,  at  Benson,  Vt.  Previous  to 
this  he  had  received  urgent  requests  from  the  Rev.  Mr.  Hill, 
of  the  First  Church  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  and  Rev.  Mr.  Parke, 
of  the  church  in  West  Troy,  uniting  with  their  respective 
churches,  for  a  course  of  lectures  in  each  place :  and  they 
were  expected,  in  West  Troy,  to  have  been  commenced  pre- 
vious to  those  in  Benson,  Vt.  Their  disappointment,  and 
the  great  anxiety  of  ministers  and  people,  at  that  period,  to 
secure  his  services,  may  be  judged  of  by  the  following  letter 
from  the  pastor  of  the  church  in  that  place  : 

"  West  Troy,  March  12th,  1838. 

"  William  S.  Miller,  Esq.  :*  Dear  Sir, —  I  received 
a  line  from  you,  dated  March  1st,  and  was  glad  to  hear  that 
Father  Miller  had  concluded  to  visit  West  Troy  on  Saturday 
last.  With  much  anxiety  all  looked  forward  to  that  day, 
expecting  the  privilege  of  hearing  something  upon  the  sub- 
ject of  Christ's  Second  Coming.  But,  alas  !  we  are  dis- 
appointed.  Dear  sir,  I  write  these  few  lines,  letting  you 
know  something  of  the  state  of  feeling  in  this  place  upon  the 
subject  of  Mr.  Miller's  lectures.  In  the  street,  in  the  house, 
in  short,  wherever  (almost)  you  meet  an  individual,  the  first 
thing  is,  Has  Mr.  Miller  come  yet  ?  When  is  Mr.  Miller 
going  to  be  here  ]  What  is  the  reason  he  does  not  come  ? 
&c.  If  the  old  gentleman  can  possibly  come  down  to  West 
Troy,  I  wish  him  to  come  as  soon  as  possible.  I  hope  he 
will  not  delay.  I  think  we  have  a  little  claim  upon  him,  if 
our  wishes  may  be  brought  into  account.  Dear  sir,  up- 
on the  reception  of  this,  please  write  me  the  reason  of  the 
disappointment ;  also,  when  he  will  come,  if  at  all,  that  I 
may  give  an  answer  to  them  that  ask. 
"  Yours  in  haste, 

'•'Frederick  S.  Parke." 

At  the  same  date,  Mr.  Miller's  son  received  a  letter  from 
Troy,  N.  Y.,  stating  that  "  Rev.  Mr.  Hill  is  at  present  very 
anxious,  and  most  of  his  church,  for  your  father  to  come  to 
East  Troy  first,  and  he  has  undertaken  a  negotiation  with 

*  A  son  of  Mr.  M..,  who  was  at  that  time  Postmaster  in  Low  Hampton. 


URGENT   APPEAL.  131 

Elder  Parke  for  your  father  to  visit  them  half  of  the 
time/' 

In  compliance  with  these  urgent  requests,  he  commenced  a 
course  of  lectures  at  West  Troy.  N.  Y.,  on  the  8th  of  March, 
and  continued  till  the  loth,  when  he  began  in  East  Troy,  where 
he  continued  till  the  25th.  These  were  attended  with  happy 
results.  In  March  of  the  next  year,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Parke 
wrote  Mr.  Miller  as  follows  : 

"It  is  my  privilege  to  say  that  God  in  mercy  is  doing  a 
great  work  in  West  Troy.  Old  and  young  and  middle-aged 
are  alike  made  the  happy  recipients  of  grace.  The  Dutch 
Reformed  church  are  enjoying  an  interesting  state  of  things. 
The  Methodists  are  full  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  Baptists  are 
pressing  on  in  the  good  cause.  Praise  the  Lord  !  A  num- 
ber date  their  awakening  to  your  lectures  on  the  Second 
Coming  of  Christ.  .  .  .  You  have  great  reason  to 
rejoice  that  God  is  pleased  to  make  you  the  honored  instru- 
ment of  awakening  poor  sinners." 

Previous  to  these  lectures,  he  had  received  the  following 
urgent  request  from  Rev.  Emerson  Andrews,  of  the  Baptist 
church  in  Rome,  N.  Y.  : 

"Rome,  X.  Y.5  March  20,  1888. 

"Dear  Brother  Miller: —  ....  We  have 
heard  something  of  you  and  yours,  and  want  to  see  you  here 
in  person,  and  hear  your  whole  course  of  lectures.  I  feel  as 
if  the  time  had  arrived  for  you  *  to  preach  the  Gospel  at  Rome 
also.'  There  is  more  attention  to  religion  now  than  formerly, 
and  some  anxiety.  The  desire  to  hear  from  you  is  very 
great.  We  want  you  to  come  immediately,  the  first  Sunday 
if  possible.  Don't,  I  beg  of  you,  make  any  delay,  or  ex- 
case,  but  come  right  off.  .  *  .  .  I  want  you  to  be  here 
before  the  time  if  possible.7* 

Engagements  at  Troy  made  it  necessary  to  defer  compli- 
ance with  the  above  till  they  were  attended  to.  After  a 
few  days'  rest,  he  visited  Rome,  N.  Y.,  began  his  lectures 
there  on  the  6th  of  May,  and  continued  till  the  16th.  In 
the  absence  of  any  journal,  or  of  any  reference  to  these  lec- 
tures in  any  of  the  letters  preserved  by  him,  their  results 
cannot  be  here  recorded. 
12* 


132  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

In  June  following,  he  again  visited  his  friends  in  Canada 
East,  and  lectured  at  Outlet  on  the  10th  and  11th.  and  at 
Bolton  from  the  12th  to  the  14th, —  returning  home  before 
the  end  of  the  month.  After  this  he  gave  courses  of  lec- 
tures, commencing  on  the  26th  of  August,  at  Braintree,  Vt. ; 
on  the  16th  of  September,  at  White  Creek,  Vt.  ;  on  the  3d 
of  October,  at  Pittsfield,  Vt. ;  on  the  7th,  at  Randolph,  Vt., 
and  on  the  16th  at  Brookfield,  Vt. 

This  last  course  was  given  at  the  urgent  request  of  Rev. 
Jehiel  Claflin  and  the  Baptist  church  in  that  place.  As 
early  as  the  26th  of  June,  Mr.  C.  wrote  him  :  "  There  are 
a  great  many  people  in  this  and  the  adjoining  towns  who 
are  very  anxious  to  hear  you  lecture  on  the  subject  of  the 
Millennium."  And,  on  the  16th  of  July,  he  wrote  :  "  I  re- 
ceived your  favor  of  the  30th  ult,  and  read  the  same  with 
much  delight,  to  find  that  you  could  gratify  the  wish  of  so 
many  friends  in  this  and  the  adjacent  towns.  I  read  your 
letter  in  meeting,  yesterday,  to  my  congregation ;  and,  some 
being  present  from  abroad,  I  consulted  them  according  to 
your  recjuest,  and  found  an  increasing  anxiety  in  their  minds 
that  you  should  come  and  lecture  in  this  vicinity,  or  near 
by." 

On  the  7th  of  November  he  commenced  a  course  of  lec- 
tures at  Montpelier,  Vt. ,  which  he  continued  there  and  in  the 
neighborhood  till  the  23d.  On  the  17th,  he  writes  from  that 
place  to  his  son : 

M  There  is  a  great  excitement  on  the  subject  in  this  place. 
Last  night  we  had  a  solemn  and  interesting  meeting.  There 
was  a  great  breaking  down,  and  much  weeping.  Some  souls 
have  been  born  again.  I  can  hardly  get  away  from  this 
people.  They  want  me  to  stay  another  week ;  but  I  shall 
go  to  the  next  village  on  Monday.  Mr.  Kellogg,  the  Con- 
gregational minister  here,  is  a  good  man,  and  his  church  are 
living  Christians.  Montpelier  is  quite  a  considerable  village, 
and  contains  some  very  intelligent  people,  who  appear  to 
listen  with  much  interest.  This  afternoon  I  meet  the  citi- 
zens, and  am  to  give  them  an  opportunity  to  ask  questions 
and  state  objections.  .  .  .  May  God  help  me  to  give  his 
truth  !  I  know  my  own  weakness,  and  I  know  that  I  have 
neither  power  of  body  nor  of  mind  to  do  what  the  Lord  is 
doing  by  me.     It  is  the  Lord's  doings  and  marvellous  in  our 


PUBLIC    LECTURES.  133 

eyes.  The  world  do  not  know  how  weak  I  am.  They  think 
much  more  of  the  old  man  than  /think  of  him." 

A  gentleman  in  this  place,  on  the  20th  of  February  fol- 
lowing, wrote  to  Mr.  M.  as  follows  :  "  I  am  happy  to  inform 
you  that  your  labors  with  us  have  been  blessed,  and  twenty 
have  united  with  our  church  [the  Baptist]  since  you  left 
Montpelier,  and  twenty  or  thirty  more  will  soon  join,  all  of 
whom  date  their  awakening  at  the  time  you  lectured  here. 
Brother  Kellogg  (the  Congregationalist  minister)  is  strong 
in  the  faith,  and  his  views  are  with  Brother  Miller  on  the 
second  coming  of  Christ." 

On  the  24th  of  November,  he  commenced  a  series  of  lec- 
tures in  Jericho,  Vt.,  which  continued  till  the  2d  of  Decem- 
ber. On  the  28th  of  this  month,  he  went  to  Stockbridge, 
Vt.,  and  on  the  30th  to  Rochester,  where  he  continued  till 
the  6th  of  January,  1839. 

On  the  7th  of  January,  1839,  he  wrote  to  his  son  from 
Bethel,  Vt.,  that  he  had  lectured  in  those  places  to  large  au- 
diences, and  was  on  his  way  to  Woodstock.  He  arrived  at 
that  place  on  the  7th,  and  commenced  a  second  course  of  lec- 
tures, which  continued  to  the  14th.  From  that  date  to  the 
20th,  he  lectured  at  Pomfret,  Vt, ;  from  the  21st  to  the  27th, 
at  Bethel,  Vt.  ;  and  from  the  28th  to  the  31st,  at  Gaysville, 
Vt. ;  —  from  which  place  he  returned  home.  On  the  28th, 
he  wrote  from  Gaysville  to  his  son : 

"  There  has  been  a  reformation  in  every  place  that  I  have 
lectured  in  since  I  left  home,  and  the  work  is  progressing 
in  every  place  rapidly.  The  meeting-houses  are  crowded 
to  overflowing.  Much  excitement  prevails  among  the  peo- 
ple. Many  say  they  believe j  some  scoff;  others  are  sober 
and  thinking.  Give  my  love  to  all  —  mother  and  the 
children.     I  remain  yours,  etc.  Wm.  Miller." 

On  the  10th  of  March,  he  commenced  in  Essex,  Vt.,  and 
lectured  till  the  17th.  From  the  18th  to  the  24th,  he  was 
at  Williston,  Vt. ;  and  on  the  26th  he  commenced  another 
course  of  lectures  at  Waterbury,  Vt.,  which  closed  on  the 
1st  of  April.  Having  projected  a  tour  into  Massachusetts 
about  this  time,  he  was  obliged  to  disappoint  a  large  num- 
ber who  had  solicited  visits  from  him.     As  evidence  of  the 


134  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

great  desire  to  hear  him,  he  then  had  on  file  urgent  re- 
quests from  Frederic  Daley,  "  preacher  in  charge,"  North- 
field,  Vt., —  with  fifteen  signatures  from  Strafford,  Vt., — 
expressing  "a  great  anxiety  on  the  part  of  the  public  to 
hear  a  course  of  lectures ;"  from  Joseph  Chase,  Middlesex, 
announcing  that  the  meeting-house  had  been  opened  for 
him  without  a  dissenting  vote,  and  urging  him  to  come,  by 
all  means ;  Wm.  D.  Leavett,  Grantham,  N.  H.  —  urging 
his  presence  there  "  at  as  early  a  day  as  possible ;"  Z.  Del- 
ano, Hartford,  Vt.,  wishing  him  to  come  as  early  "as  prac- 
ticable;" Jonathan  Woods,  Dover,  Vt.  —  "  many  people 
being  desirous  to  hear;"  Hiram  Freeman,  pastor  of  the 
Congregationalist  church  in  Middlesex,  Vt.  —  stating  that 
"  the  church  would  gladly  see  him,  and  were  generally  anx- 
ious for  him  to  come,"  etc.,  etc. ;  — none  of  which  appear  to 
have  been  complied  with. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

VISITS   MASSACHUSETTS INVITATION    TO  LOWELL EXTRACT  FROM 

THE     LYNN    RECORD IS     INVITED     TO    BOSTON CONVERSATION 

WITH   ELDER    HIMES  —  PUBLICATION    OP     HIS     LECTURES     BY    MR. 

MUSSEY LABORS     IN     PORTSMOUTH INTERVIEW     WITH    ELDER 

ROBINSON,  ETC. 

In  compliance  with  an  invitation  from  Mr.  Seth  Mann, 
of  Randolph,  Mass.,  dated  January  15th,  1839,  informing 
him  that  C'I,  myself,  and  many  of  our  Baptist  and  Pedo- 
Baptist  friends  here,  wish  you  to  come  and  preach  to  us," 
Mr.  Miller  visited  Massachusetts,  and  arrived,  for  the  first 
time,  in  Boston,  on  the  evening  of  April  18th.  The  next 
day  he  wrote  as  follows : 

"  Boston,  April  19th,  10  o'clock  A.  M.,  1839. 
"  Dear  Son  :  — I  am  now  in  this  place,  hearty  and  well. 
Start  at  half-past  twelve  for  Randolph,  where  I  expect  to  be 
next  week.  Roads  were  very  bad.  Snow-storm  night  be- 
fore last  in  Keene,  N.  H.  —  pleasant  yesterday  and  to-day. 
I  have  been  running  about  this  morning  —  visited  India 
wharf,  the  new  Market,  Faneuil  Hall,  etc.,  etc.     Busy  time 


LECTURES   IN   LOWELL.  135 

in  Boston.  I  have  no  news  as  yet.  Will  write  as  often  as 
you  will  wish  to  hear.  I  stopped  at  the  Pemberton  House, 
No.  9  Howard  Street. 

11  Yours,  etc.  Wm.  Miller." 

He  reached  Randolph,  and  commenced  his  first  course  of 
lectures  in  Massachusetts  on  the  21st  of  April  of  that  year. 
He  closed  his  lectures  there  on  the  28th;  commenced  in 
Stoughton,  Mass.,  on  the  29th,  and  continued  to  the  6th  of 
May;  lectured  at  Braintree,  Mass..  on  the  7th  and  8th,  and 
from  the  9th  to  the  13th  in  East  Randolph,  Mass.  His  lec- 
tures in  these  places  were  attended  by  powerful  revivals.  On 
the  27th  of  May,  Mr.  Mann  wrote  to  him  from  Randolph, 
saying: 

"The  Lord,  we  trust,  is  doing  a  gracious  work  in  this 
place.  There  have  been  twelve  or  fourteen  already  con- 
verted, and  at  the  close  of  the  last  meeting  about  twenty 
arose  for  prayers.  Our  last  conference  meeting  was  so 
crowded  that  we  had  to  adjourn  to  the  meeting-house.  .  .  . 
There  appears  to  be  a  great  solemnity  on  the  minds  of  ^ 
nearly  all  in  Mr.  M'Leish's  society.  A  powerful  work  is 
going  on  in  East  Randolph." 

In  July  following,  Rev.  Charles  Peabody  transmitted  to  Mr. 
M.  the  unanimous  vote  of  the  church  for  him  to  repeat  his 
lectures  in  Randolph ;  but  he  does  not  appear  to  have  done  so. 

Previous  to  Mr.  Miller's  visit  to  Massachusetts,  Elder  T. 
Cole,  of  Lowell,  had  heard  of  the  results  attending  his 
labors  in  Vermont,  and  had  written  for  him  to  visit  that 
city.  The  dress  of  Mr.  Miller  was  very  plain  and  ordinary, 
much  more  befitting  his  profession  of  a  farmer  than  of  a 
preacher.  Elder  Cole,  from  the  reports  of  his  great  success, 
expected  him  to  appear  like  some  distinguished  doctor  of 
divinity.  When  Mr.  M.  came  to  Randolph,  Elder  C.  ob- 
tained a  promise  of  his  services  in  Lowell,  to  commence  on 
the  14th  of  May,  and  was  requested  to  meet  him  at  the 
cars.  He  had  heard  that  Mr.  Miller  wore  a  camlet  cloak 
and  white  hat,  but  expected  to  see  a  fashionably-dressed 
gentleman.  On  the  arrival  of  the  cars,  he  went  to  the  depot 
to  meet  him.  He  watched  closely  the  appearance  of  all  the 
passengers  as  they  left  the  cars,  but  saw  no  one  who  cor- 
responded with  his  expectations  of  Mr.  M.     Soon  he  saw  an 


136  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM    MILLED. 

old  man.  shaking  with  the  palsy,  with  a  white  hat  and  cam- 
let cloak,  alight  from  the  cars.  Fearing  that  this  one  might 
prove  to  be  the  man,  and.  if  so.  regretting  that  he  had 
invited  him  to  lecture  in  his  church,  he  stepped  up  to  him, 
and  whispered  in  his  ear. — 

••  Is  your  name  Miller  ? " 

Mr.  M.  nodded  assent. 

"Well,"  said  he.  "follow  me." 

He  led  the  way.  talking  on  ahead,  and  Mr.  M.  keeping 
as  near  as  he  could,  till  he  reached  his  house.  He  was 
much  chagrined  that  he  had  written  for  a  man  of  Mr,  M.'s 
appearance,  who.  he  concluded,  could  know  nothing  respect- 
ing the  Bible,  but  would  confine  his  discourse  to  visions  and 
fancies  of  his  own. 

After  tea.  he  told  Mr.  M.  he  supposed  it  was  about  time 
to  attend  church :  and  again  led  the  way.  Mr.  M.  bringing 
up  the  rear.  He  showed  Mr.  M.  into  the  desk,  but  took  a 
seat  himself  among  the  congregation.  Mr.  M.  read  a  hymn; 
after  it  was  sung  he  prayed,  and  read  another  hymn,  which 
was  also  sung.  He  felt  unpleasant  at  being  left  in  the  pulpit 
alone,  but  took  for  his  text:  ,; Looking  for  that  blessed  hope. 
and  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ.5'  This  he  sustained  and  illustrated  by  apposite 
quotations  of  Scripture,  proving  a  second  personal  and  glo- 
rious appearing  of  Christ.  Elder  C.  listened  for  about 
fifteen  minutes,  when,  seeing  that  he  presented  nothing  but 
the  word  of  God.  and  that  he  opened  the  Scriptures  in  a 
manner  that  did  honor  to  the  occasion,  like  a  workman  who 
needeth  not  to  be  ashamed,  he  walked  up  into  the  pulpit, 
and  took  his  seat.  Mr.  M.  lectured  there  from  the  14th  to 
the  22d  of  May.  and  again  from  the  29th  to  the  4th  of 
June.  A  glorious  revival  followed,  and  Elder  C.  embraced 
his  views  in  full,  continuing  for  six  years  a  devoted  advocate 
of  them.  On  the  25th  of  July.  Elder  C.  wrote  Mr.  M.  that, 
since  the  lectures,  he  "  had  baptized  about  forty,  sixty  in  all 
having  joined  the  church :  and  there  are  yet  some  who  are 
seeking  the  Lard."  Mr.  Miller  says  of  his  visit:  "At 
Lowell  I  also  became  acquainted  with  my  Bro.  J.  Litch, 
who  had  previously  embraced  my  views,  and  who  has  since 
so  aided  their  extension  by  his  faithful  lectures  and  writings. 
and  energetic  and  consistent  course. r; 


AN  editor's  opinion.  137 

From  the  24th  to  the  28th  of  May,  Mr.  M.  lectured  in 
Groton,  Mass.,  and  from  the  3d  to  the  9th  of  June,  in  Lynn, 
Mass.  In  connection  with  his  visit  to  this  place,  he  made 
the  following  entry  in  his  memorandum-book:  "  Thus  ends 
my  tour  into  Massachusetts,  making  eight  hundred  lectures 
from  October  1,  1834,  to  June  9,  1839  —  four  years,  six 
months,  nine  days."  The  editor  of  the  "Lynn  Record" 
gave  the  following  notice  of  Mr.  Miller,  and  his  visit  to  that 
place  :  — 


"  We  took  a  prejudice  against  this  good  man,  when  he  first 
cume  among  us,  on  account  of  what  we  supposed  a  glaring 
error  in  interpreting  the  Scripture  prophecies  so  that  the 
world  would  come  to  an  end  in  1843.  We  are  still  inclined 
to  believe  this  an  error  or  miscalculation.  At  the  same  time 
we  have  overcome  our  prejudices  against  him  by  attending 
his  lectures,  and  learning  more  of  the  excellent  character  of 
the  man,  and  of  the  great  good  he  has  done  and  is  doing. 
Mr.  Miller  is  a  plain  farmer,  and  pretends  to  nothing  except 
that  he  has  made  the  Scripture  prophecies  an  intense  study 
for  many  years,  understands  some  of  them  differently  from 
most  other  people,  and  wishes,  for  the  good  of  others,  to 
spread  his  views  before  the  public.  No  one  can  hear  him 
five  minutes  without  being  convinced  of  his  sincerity,  and 
instructed  by  his  reasoning  and  information.  All  acknowl- 
edge his  lectures  to  be  replete  with  useful  and  interesting 
matter.  His  knowledge  of  Scripture  is  very  extensive  and 
minute:  that  of  the  prophecies,  especially,  surprisingly 
familiar.  His  application  of  the  prophecies  to  the  great 
events  which  have  taken  place  in  the  natural  and  moral 
world  is  such,  generally,  as  to  produce  conviction  of  their 
truth,  and  gain  the  ready  assent  of  his  hearers.  We  have 
reason  to  believe  that  the  preaching  or  lecturing  of  Mr. 
Miller  has  been  productive  of  great  and  extensive  good. 
Revivals  have  followed  in  his  train.  He  has  been  heard 
with  attention  wherever  he  has  been 

•  *  There  is  nothing  very  peculiar  in  the  manner  or  appear- 
ance of  Mr.  Miller.  Both  are  at  least  equal  to  the  style 
and  appearance  of  ministers  in  general.  His  gestures  are 
easy  and  expressive,  and  his  personal  appearance  every  way 


138  LIFE    OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

decorous.  His  Scripture  explanations  and  illustrations  are 
strikingly  simple,  natural,  and  forcible ;  and  the  great  eager- 
ness of  the  people  to  hear  him  has  been  manifested  wherever 
he  has  preached." 

On  his  way  home  he  lectured  at  the  following  places  : — 
Commencing  on  the  16th  of  June  at  Westford,  Vt.;  the 
23d,  at  Cambridge,  Vt.,  and  on  the  30th  at  Colchester,  Vt. 
As  a  result  of  his  labors  in  Colchester,  twenty-^three  were 
added  to  the  Baptist  church  between  that  time  and  the  2d 
of  December  following. 

The  letters  addressed  to  him  and  his  son  at  this  period 
show  that  a  report  was  in  circulation  that  he  was  dead ;  and, 
as  soon  as  that  was  successfully  contradicted,  another  was 
current  that,  on  reexamining  his  calculations,  he  had  discov- 
ered a  mistake  of  one  hundred  years.  Both  of  these  rumors 
were  several  times  subsequently  revived,  and  had  to  be  as 
often  contradicted. 

On  the  15th  of  September,  in  compliance  with  "  the  wish 
of  many  in  Rutland,  Vt.,"  who  were  "very  anxious  to 
hear"  his  "course  of  lectures,"  he  visited  that  place,  and 
lectured  each  day,  to  the  22d,  when  he  returned  to  his 
family,  and  made  arrangements  for  a  second  visit  to  Massa- 
chusetts. 

He  commenced  his  labors  at  Groton,  Mass.,  on  the  13th 
of  October,  and  lectured  ten  days.  In  reference  to  these 
lectures  and  others  in  neighboring  towns,  Rev.  Silas  Hawley, 
Congregational  minister,  wrote  from  Groton,  on  the  10th  of 
April,  1840,  as  follows  :  — 

"  Mr.  Miller  has  lectured  in  this  and  adjoining  towns 
with  marked  success.  His  lectures  have  been  succeeded  by 
precious  revivals  of  religion  in  all  those  places.  A  class 
of  minds  are  reached  by  him  not  within  the  influence  of 
other  men.  His  lectures  are  well  adapted,  so  far  as  I  have 
learned,  for  shaking  the  supremacy  of  the  various  forms  of 
error  that  are  rife  in  the  community." 

Closing  his  lectures  in  Groton,  Mr.  M.  gave  a  third  course 
of  lectures  in  Lowell,  continuing  from  the  23d  of  October 
to  the  1st  of  November.  These,  like  the  previous  lectures 
in  that  place,  were  attended  with  precious  fruits. 

From  the  2d  to  the  10th  of  November,  he  lectured  in 


LECTURES   IN   BOSTON.  139 

Haverhill.  Mass.,  where  he  made  the  acquaintance  of  Elder 
Henry  Plummer,  pastor  of  the  Christian  church,  who  em- 
braced his  views,  and  was  a  steadfast  friend  till  Mr.  Miller's 
decease. 

On  the  11th  of  November  Mr.  M.  commenced  a  course 
of  lectures  in  Exeter,  N.  H.,  which  continued  till  the  19th. 
On  the  12th  a  conference  of  the  Christian  Connection  was 
in  session  there,  and  they  called  on  Mr.  Miller  in  a  body. 
He  was  a  stranger  to  nearly  all  of  them ;  and  few  of  them 
regarded  his  views  with  anything  more  than  mere  curiosity. 
Several  of  them  questioned  him  respecting  his  faith ;  but 
they  were  speedily  silenced  by  the  quotation  of  appropriate 
texts  of  Scripture. 

It  was  on  this  occasion  that  he  became  acquainted  with 
Elder  Joshua  V.  Himes,  then  pastor  of  the  Chardon-street 
church,  Boston.  Elder  H.  had  written  to  Mr.  M.,  on  the 
19th  of  October,  inviting  him  to  give  a  course  of  lectures  in 
his  chapel.  He  now  renewed  his  invitation,  and  got  the 
promise  of  a  course  of  lectures  in  December.  Before  com- 
mencing there,  Mr.  Miller  gave  a  second  course  of  lectures 
in  Stoughton,  Mass.,  from  the  24th  to  the  29th  of  Novem- 
ber, and  one  in  Canton,  Mass.,  from  the  1st  to  the  6th  of 
December.  In  this  last  place,  he  writes  to  his  son,  he 
ki  lectured  three  times  on  the  last  day,  to  a  house  jammed 
full."  Pressing  invitations  for  further  labors  in  the  surround- 
ing region  had  to  be  disregarded,  in  order  to  fulfil  his  en- 
gagement in  the  metropolis  of  New  England. 

He  arrived  in  Boston  on  the  7th  of  December,  and  from 
the  8th  to  the  16th  lectured  in  the  Chardon-street  chapel, — 
his  first  course  of  lectures  in  that  city. 

On  the  12th  of  December  Mr.  Miller  writes  from  Boston 
to  his  son  :  —  "  I  am  now  in  this  place  lecturing,  twice  a 
clay,  to  large  audiences.  Many,  very  many,  go  away  un- 
able to  gain  admittance.  Many,  I  am  informed,  are  under 
serious  convictions.     I  hope  God  will  work  in  this  city." 

At  this  time  he  stopped  at  the  house  of  Elder  Himes,  who 
had  much  conversation  with  him  respecting  his  views,  his 
plans  for  the  future,  and  his  responsibilities.  Elder  H. 
became  impressed  with  the  correctness  of  Mr.  M.'s  views 
respecting  the  nearness  and  nature  of  Christ's  coming;  but 
was  not  fully  satisfied  respecting  the  time.  He  was,  how- 
13 


1-40  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

ever,  sufficiently  convinced  that  Mr.  Miller  was  communi- 
cating important  truths,  to  feel  a  great  interest  in  their  pro- 
mulgation. 

••When  Mr.  Miller  had  closed  his  lectures."'  says  Elder 
H.j  "  I  found  myself  in  a  new  position.  I  could  not  believe 
or  preach  as  I  had  done.  Light  on  this  subject  was  blazing 
on  my  conscience  day  and  night.  A  long  conversation  with 
Mr.  Miller  then  took  place,  on  our  duties  and  responsibilities. 
I  said  to  Bra  Miller.  '  Do  you  really  believe  this  doctrine  V 

'•'He  replied,  !  Certainly  I  do,  or  I  would  not  preach  it.3 

1 l  •  What  are  you  doing  to  spread  or  diffuse  it  through  the 
world  ? ' 

"  CI  have  done,  and  am  still  doing,  all  I  can.' 

11  -Well,  the  whole  thing  is  kept  in  a  corner  yet.  There 
is  but  little  knowledge  on  the  subject,  after  all  you  have  done. 
If  Christ  is  to  come  in  a  few  years,  as  you  believe,  no  time 
should  be  lost  in  giving  the  church  and  world  warning,  in 
thunder-tones,  to  arouse  them  to  prepare.' 

iC  c  I  know  it,  I  know  it,  Bro.  Himes,'  said  he ;  *'  but  what 
can  an  old  farmer  do  ?  I  was  never  used  to  public  speaking  : 
I  stand  quite  alone ;  and,  though  I  have  labored  much,  and 
seen  many  converted  to  God  and  the  truth,  yet  no  one.  as 
yet,  seems  to  enter  into  the  object  and  spirit  of  my  mis- 
sio?i,  so  as  to  render  me  much  aid.  They  like  to  have  me 
preach,  and  build  up  their  churches ;  and  there  it  ends,  with 
most  of  the  ministers,  as  yet,  I  have  been  looking  for  help, 
—  I  want  help.' 

"  It  was  at  this  time  that  I  laid  myself,  family,  society, 
reputation,  all,  upon  the  altar  of  God,  to  help  him,  to  the 
extent  of  my  power,  to  the  end.  I  then  inquired  of  him 
what  parts  of  the  country  he  had  visited,  and  whether  he  had 
visited  any  of  our  principal  cities. 

"  He  informed  me  of  his  labors," —  as  given  in  the  fore- 
going pages. 

"  'But  why,'  I  said,  -'have  you  not  been  into  the  large 
cities  ? ' 

"  He  replied  that  his  rule  was  to  visit  those  places  where 
invited,  and  that  he  had  not  been  invited  into  any  of  the 
large  cities. 

"  '  Well,'  said  I,  c  will  you  go  with  me  where  doors  are 
opened  ? ' 


I 


PUBLICATION   OF   HIS   LECTURES.  141 

u  '  Yes,  I  am  ready  to  go  anywhere,  and  labor  to  the>  ex- 
tent of  my  ability  to  the  end.' 

"  I  then  told  him  he  might  prepare  for  the  campaign ;  for 
doors  should  be  opened  in  every  city  in  the  Union,  and  the 
warning  should  go  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  !  Here  I  began 
to  'help'  Father  Miller." 

With  this  epoch  commenced  an  entire  new  era  in  the 
spread  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Advent.  B.  B.  Mussey,  Esq., 
a  distinguished  Boston  publisher,  undertook  the  publication 
of  a  revised  edition,  of  five  thousand  copies,  of  Mr.  Miller's 
Lectures,  on  condition  that  Mr.  Miller  would  secure  the 
copyright.  Mr.  M.  did  so,  which  subjected  himself  to  some 
blame,  where  the  reason  for  the  act  was  not  known.  Mr. 
M.  gave  to  Mr.  Mussey  the  entire  profits  of  the  edition  for 
two  hundred  copies  of  the  work,  which  Mr.  Mussey  gave  him. 

On  the  17th  of  December  Mr.  M.  lectured  in  Westford, 
where  he  was  refused  the  use  of  the  Congregational  church, 
—  the.  first  place  of  worship  that  was  ever  closed  against 
him.  From  the  19th  to  the  26th  of  December,  he  lectured 
in  Littleton,  Mass.  The  result  of  these  lectures  is  indicated 
by  a  letter  of  Rev.  Oliver  Ayer  (Baptist),  who  writes,  in 
January  :  —  "I  baptized  twelve  at  our  last  communion.  I 
shall,  probably,  baptize  from  fifteen  to  twenty  next  time. 
There  have  been  from  thirty-five  to  forty  hopeful  conversions. 
There  is  also  quite  a  work  in  "Westford, —  ten  or  twelve  con- 
versions, and  twenty  or  thirty  inquirers.  The  work  is  still 
going  on." 

On  the  28th  he  returned  to  Boston,  and  repeated  his 
course  of  lectures  in  Mr.  Himes'  chapel,  closing  on  the  5th 
of  January,  1840.  The  day  following,  by  request  of  the 
Baptist  church  under  the  c^re  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Parker,  he 
visited  Cambridgeport,  and  lectured  there  each  day  till  the 
13th  of  January.  From  the  14th  to  the  20th,  he  gave  a 
second  course  of  lectures  to  Elder  Plummer's  society,  in 
Haverhill,  Mass. 

On  the  21st  of  January,  1840,  he  visited  Portsmouth, 
N.  H.,  and  commenced  his  first  course  of  lectures  in  that 
city.  The  following  article,  in  reference  to  them,  from  the 
pen  of  Elder  David  Millard,  pastor  of  the  Christian  Society 
there,  appeared  in  the  columns  of  the  Christian  Herald,  a 
few  weeks  subsequently : 


142  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   WILLI 

c;  On  the  21st  of  January  Bro.  William  Miller  earne  into 
town,  and  commenced,  in  our  chapel,  his  course  of  lectures 
on  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ.  During  the  nine 
that  he  remained  crowds  flocked  to  hear  him.  Before  he 
concluded  his  lectures  a  large  number  of  anxious  souls  came 
forward  for  prayers.  Our  meetings  continued,  every  day 
and  evening,  for  a  length  of  time  after  he  left.  Such  an 
intense  state  of  feeling  as  now  pervaded  our  congregation  we 
never  witnessed  before  in  any  place.  Not  unfrequently  from 
sixty  to  eighty  would  come  forward  for  prayers  on  an  even- 
ing. Such  an  awful  spirit  of  solemnity  seemed  to  settle 
down  on  the  place  that  hard  must  be  that  sinner's  heart  that 
could  withstand  it  Yet,  during  the  whole,  not  an  appear- 
ance of  confusion  occurred;  all  was  order  and  solemnity. 
Generally,  as  soon  as  souls  found  deliverance,  they  were 
ready  to  proclaim  it.  and  exhort  their  friends,  in  the  most 
moving  language,  to  come  to  the  fountain  of  life.  Our 
meetings  thus  continued,  on  evenings,  for  six  weeks  :  indeed, 
they  have  thus  continued,  with  very  little  intermission,  up 
to  the  present. 

"  Probably  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  souls  have  been 
converted  in  our  meetings :  but  a  part  of  these  were  from 
other  congregations,  and  have  returned  to  their  former  meet- 
ings.  Among  the  converts  are  a  considerable  number  from 
the  Universalist  congregation :  these  still  remain  with  us. 
From  our  meetings  this  blessed  work  soon  spread  into  every 
congregation  in  town  favorable  to  revivals.  In  several  of 
them  it  is  at  present  spreading  with  power.  For  weeks  to- 
gether, the  ringing  of  bells,  for  dailv  meetings,  rendered  our 
town  like  a  continual  Sabbath.  Indeed,  such  a  season  of 
revival  was  never  witnessed  before  in  Portsmouth  by  the 
oldest  inhabitant.  It  would  be  difficult,  at  present,  to  ascer- 
tain the  exact  number  of  conversions  in  town  :  it  is  variously 
estimated  at  from  five  hundred  to  seven  hundred.  We  have 
received  into  fellowship  eighty-one :  nine  of  these  were  re- 
ceived on  previous  profession.  We  have  baptized  sixty- 
seven,  and  the  others  stand  as  candidates  for  baptism. 
Never,  while  we  linger  on  the  shores  of  mortality,  do  we 
expect  to  enjoy  more  of  heaven  than  we  have  in  some  of  our 
late  meetings,  and  on  baptizing  occasions.  At  the  water- 
side thousands  would  gather  to  witness  this  solemn  institu- 


INTERVIEW   WITH  ELDER  ROBINSON.  143 

tion  in  Zion,  and  many  would  return  from  the  place  weeping. 
Our  brethren  at  the  old  chapel  have  had  some  additions, — 
we  believe  some  over  twenty." 

The  Rev.  Mr.  Peabody,  of  Portsmouth,  in  a  sermon,  pub- 
lished soon  after,  spoke  of  the  revival  which  commenced 
there  in  connection  with  Mr.  Miller's  labors,  as  follows : 

"  If  I  am  rightly  informed,  the  present  season  of  religious 
excitement  has  been,  to  a  great  degree,  free  from  what,  I 
confess,  has  always  made  me  dread  such  times, —  I  mean 
those  excesses  and  extravagances  which  wound  religion  in 
the  house  of  its  friends,  and  cause  its  enemies  to  blaspheme. 
I  most  cheerfully  express  my  opinion  that  there  will  be,  in 
the  fruits  of  the  present  excitement,  fer  less  to  regret,  and 
much  more  for  the  friends  of  God  to  rejoice  in, —  much  more 
to  be  recorded  in  the  book  of  eternal  life, — -than  in  any 
similar  series  of  religious  exercises  which  I  have  ever  had  the 
opportunity  of  watching." 

At  the  time  of  these  lectures,  Elder  D.  I.  Robinson  was 
stationed  in  Portsmouth,  as  the  pastor  of  the  Methodist 
church,  and  attended  a  part  of  the  course.     He  writes  :  — 

"  I  heard  him  all  I  could  the  first  week,  and  thought  I 
could  stop  his  wheels  and  confound  him  ;  but,  as  the  revival 
had  commenced  in  the  vast  congregation  assembled  to  hear, 
I  would  not  do  it  publicly,  lest  evil  should  follow.  I,  there- 
fore, visited  him  at  his  room,  with  a  formidable  list  of  objec- 
tions. To  my  surprise,  scarcely  any  of  them  were  new  to 
him,  and  he  could  answer  them  as  fast  as  I  could  present 
them.  And  then  he  presented  objections  and  questions 
which  confounded  me,  and  the  commentaries  on  which  I  had 
relied.  I  went  home  used  up,  convicted,  humbled,  and  re- 
solved to  examine  the  question.'' 

The  result  was  that  Elder  R.  became  convinced  of  the 
nearness  of  the  Advent,  and  has  since  been  a  faithful  preacher 
of  the  kingdom  at  hand.  Elder  Thomas  F.  Barry,  also,  at 
this  time  embraced  Mr.  Miller's  views,  and  continued  an 
able  and  consistent  advocate  of  the  same  till  his  death,  at 
Oswego,  N.  Y.,  July  17th,  1846. 

On  the  30th  and  31st  of  January,  Mr.  M.  again  lectured 
in  Exeter,  N.  H.,  and  from  the  2d  to  the  6th  of  February 
in  Deerfield,  N.  H.,  after  which  he  returned  to  Boston. 
13* 


CHAPTER    X. 

PUBLICATION    01    THE    "  SIGN'S    OP    THE    TIMES.*'' VISIT    TO  WATEE- 

TOWN,  PORTLAND,  NEW  YORK  CITY.  AND  OTHER  PLACES. —  LETTERS 

OF    ELDERS     MEDBURY.    ILEXIINCt.     AND     GREEN. HIS     SICKNESS, 

RESIGNATION,  etc. 
f 

From  the  S:h  to  the  29th  of  February.  Mr.  M.  gave  Lis 
third  course  of  lectures  in  Boston,  in  the  Mar' 
and  other  places,  as  the  doors  opened.  It  was  mating  this 
series  of  meetings  that  the  publication  of  a  journal,  devoted 
to  the  doctrine  of  the  Advent,  was  effected.  Mr.  Miller  (in 
1845)  thus  narrates  its  origin  :  — 

" For  a  long  time  previous  to  this,  the  papers  had  ::^aa 
filled  with  abusive  stories  respecting  ray  labors,  and  they 
had  refused  to  publish  anything  ::  ::u  ra-:   in  reply.      I  h:.a 
greatly  felt  the  need  of  some  medium  of  communication  to 
the  public.     Efforts  had  been  frequently  made  t;  commence 
the  publication  of  a  paper  which  shoul  1  be    ievoted  a;    the 
advocacy  of  the  doctrine,  and  the  oomnranication  of  ; 
ruation  on  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy.     We  had.  howe 
never  been  able  to  find  a  man  who  was  willing  to  ran 
risk  of  his  reputation  and  the  pecuniary  expense,  in  such  a 
publication. 

"  On  my  visit  to  Bost:n  in  the  winter  :f  1840,  I  men- 
tioned to  Brother  Himes  my  wishes  respecting  a  v 
the  difficulties  I  had  experienced  in  the  establishment  of  one. 
He  promptly  offered  to  commence  a  paper  which  should  be 
devoted  to  this  question,  if  I  thought  the  cause  of  truth 
would  be  thereby  advanced.  The  next  week,  without  a 
subscriber  or  any  promise  of  assistance,  he  issued  the  first 
No.  of  the  Signs  of  the  Times,  on  the  20th  of  March.  [28th 
of  February,]  1840  —  a  ion  [now  Advent  Herald] 

:h  has  been  continued  to  the  present  time. 

'•  With  this  commenced  an  entire  new  era  in  the  spread 
of  information  on  the  peculiar  points  of  my  belief     Air. 
Mussey  gave  up  to  hina  the  puVaoati:n  of  ray  lectures. 
he  published  them  in  connection  with  other  works  on  the 
prophecies,  which,  aided  by  devoted  friends,  he  scattered 


LETTER   OF   ELDER   MEDBURY.  145 

broadcast  everywhere  to  the  extent  of  his  means.  I  cannot 
here  withhold  my  testimony  to  the  efficiency  and  integrity 
of  my  Bro.  Himes.  He  has  stood  by  me  at  all  times,  perilled 
his  reputation,  and,  by  the  position  in  which  he  has  been 
placed,  has  been  more  instrumental  in  the  spread  of  these 
views  than  any  other  ten  men  who  have  embarked  in  the 
cause.  His  course,  both  in  laboring  as  a  lecturer  and  in  the 
manner  that  he  has  managed  his  publications,  meets  my  full 
approval." — Apology  and  Defence,  p.  21. 

After  the  issue  of  the  first  No.,  its  printers,  Messrs.  Dow 
&  Jackson,  proposed  to  Elder  Himes  to  issue  the  paper 
semi-monthly  for  one  year,  he  to  furnish  the  editorial  matter 
gratuitously,  and  they  to  have  all  the  proceeds  of  it.  These 
terms  being  accepted,  they  reissued  the  first  No.  on  the  20th 
of  March,  and  continued  it,  as  per  agreement,  for  one  year, 
when  it  reverted  to  Elder  Himes,  its  projector,  by  whom  it 
has  been  continued  to  the  present  time  [1853]. 

On  the  1st  of  March,  1840,  Mr.  M.  visited  Watertown, 
Mass.,  and  commenced  his  first  course  of  lectures  in  that 
place.  These  continued  nine  days,  and  were  attended  by  a 
crowded  audience.  Mr.  M.  was  much  pleased  with  his 
reception  there,  and,  after  leaving,  wrote  to  his  son :  — 

"  I  have  never  seen  so  great  an  effect  in  any  one  place  as 
there.  I  preached  last  from  Gen.  19  :  17.  There  were  from 
a  thousand  to  fifteen  hundred  present,  and  more  than  one 
hundred  under  conviction.  One  half  of  the  congregation 
wept  like  children  when  I  parted  from  them.  Mr.  Medbury, 
the  Baptist  minister,  a  good  man,  wept  as  though  his  heart 
would  break  when  he  took  me  by  the  hand,  and,  for  himself 
and  people,  bade  me  farewell.  He  and  many  others  fell  upon 
my  neck,  and  wept  and  kissed  me,  and  sorrowed  most  of  all 
that  they  should  see  my  face  no  more.  We  could  not  get 
away  for  more  than  an  hour,  and  finally  we  had  to  break 
away.     About  twenty  were  converted  while  I  was  there." 

Rev.  R.  B.  Medbury  afterwards  gave  the  following  ac- 
count of  the  result  of  Mr.  Miller's  lectures  there,  through 
the  "  Signs  of  the  Times  "  :  — 

"  For  several  months  past  we  have  enjoyed,  and  are  still 
enjoying,  a  pleasing  work  of  grace  among  us.  This  revival, 
as  stated  in  the  account  published  in  the  Christian  Watch- 
man of  the  8th  instant,  was  in  progress  when  Mr.  Miller 


146  LIFE    OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

commenced  lecturing  here.  In  speaking  of  the  results  of 
his  labors,  however,  it  is  but  just  to  say  that  his  influence 
here  preceded  him.  It  will  be  recollected  that,  some  time  in 
January,  he  lectured  at  Cambridgeport,  about  four  miles 
from  us.  Many,  both  of  our  church  and  congregation, 
attended  one  or  more  of  those  lectures.  The  first  two  sub- 
jects of  the  present  work  among  us.  as  well  as  some  others, 
who  have  since  been  hopefully  converted,  regarded  those 
lectures  as  instrumental  of  fastening  permanent  conviction 
upon  their  minds.  Several  Christians,  too,  were  awakened 
to  a  new  sense  of  their  duty. 

"  There  had,  however,  been  rather  more  feeling  than 
usual  in  several  of  our  meetings  previous  to  that  time.  And 
in  the  interval  which  elapsed  between  this  time  and  the  com- 
mencement of  Mr.  Miller's  lectures  here,  the  blessing  of  God 
had  accompanied  the  means  of  grace  at  home  to  the  hopeful 
conversion  of  about  twenty.  The  work  evidently  received 
a  new  impulse  while  Mr.  Miller  was  here.  His  lectures 
were  attended  by  crowds,  who  listened  with  profound  atten- 
tion, and,  we  have  reason  to  believe,  in  not  a  few  cases  with 
profit.  Many  persons  from  neighboring  villages  shared  the 
benefit  of  his  labors  in  common  with  us,  and,  in  several 
cases,  returned  to  their  homes  rejoicing.  Other  means  of 
grace  were,  however,  mingled  with  his  labors,  which  were, 
no  doubt,  in  a  great  degree  owned  and  blessed  of  God. 

"  Among  those  who  have  since  united  with  our  church, 
many  have  mentioned  Mr.  Miller's  lectures  as  the  means, 
under  God,  of  bringing  them  to  repentance.  They  have 
generally  stated  that,  for  months  or  years,  they  had  thought 
more  or  less  on  the  subject;  but  that,  on  hearing  him,  they 
felt  it  was  time  to  take  a  stand.  The  things  of  eternity 
assumed  to  them  an  unwonted  reality.  Heaven  was  brought 
near,  and  they  felt  themselves  guilty  before  God.  It  was 
not  so  much  the  belief  that  Christ  might  come  in  1843  as  it 
was  the  certainty  of  that  event,  with  the  conviction  that 
they  were  not  prepared  to  hail  his  coming  with  joy.  Many, 
however,  who  listened  to  his  whole  course  of  lectures  with  a 
heart  unmoved,  have  since  been  melted  into  contrition,  and 
become  the  hopeful  subjects  of  renewing  grace. 

"Many  Christians  who  attended  Mr.  Miller's  lectures 
here  have  regarded  them  as  the  means  of  quickening  them 


LECTURES  IN  PORTLAND.  147 

to  new  spiritual  life.  I  know  not  that  any  one  has  embraced 
all  his  peculiar  views ;  but  many  have  been  made  to  feel 
that  time  is  short,  that  the  coming  of  Christ  is  at  hand,  and 
that  what  they  do  for  their  fellow-men  must  be  done  quickly. 
They  have  felt  that  hitherto  the  doctrine  of  the  second 
coming  of  Christ  has  had  little  or  no  practical  effect  upon 
them,  and  that,  while  they  could  suppose  at  least  one 
thousand  years  between  that  event  and  the  present  time,  its 
influence  must  be  less  than  if  it  were  a  matter  of  constant 
expectation.  They  think  that  the  contemplation  of  this 
subject  has  awakened  feelings  which  the  anticipation  of  death 
never  kindled  in  their  breasts.  Earth  has  receded,  and 
their  attachment  to  all  sublunary  objects  has  been  loosened. 
Eternity  has  seemed  to  open  near  before  them,  and  its  scenes 
have  become  more  distinct  objects  of  vision ;  while  the  soul, 
with  all  that  pertains  to  its  immortal  weal  or  woe,  has  been 
felt  to  eclipse  every  other  object  of  earth.  In  a  word,  they 
profess  to  have  consecrated  themselves  unto  the  service  of 
God,  and  to  labor  to  be  found  watching  whenever  the  Master 
of  the  house  shall  come,  i  whether  at  even,  or  at  midnight, 
or  at  the  cock-crowing,  or  in  the  morning,  lest,  coming  sud- 
denly, he  should  find  them  sleeping.5 
"  Watertown,  May  21,  1840." 

In  compliance  with  the  wishes  of  Elder  L.  D.  Fleming, 
pastor  of  the  Christian  church  in  Portland,  Me.,  Mr.  Miller 
visited  and  gave  his  first  course  of  lectures  in  that  city, 
from  the  11th  to  the  23d  of  March.  The  result  of  these 
was  thus  stated  by  Elder  Fleming,  in  April  following : 

"  There  has  probably  never  been  so  much  religious  in- 
terest among  the  inhabitants  of  this  place,  generally,  as  at 
present ;  and  Mr.  Miller  must  be  regarded,  directly  or  in- 
directly, as  the  instrument,  although  many,  no  doubt,  will 
deny  it,  as  some  are  very  unwilling  to  admit  that  a  good 
wTork  of  God  can  follow  his  labors ;  and  yet  we  have  the 
most  indubitable  evidence  that  this  is  the  work  of  the  Lord. 
It  is  worthy  of  note  that  in  the  present  interest  there  has 
been,  comparatively,  nothing  like  mechanical  effort.  There 
has  been  nothing  like  passionate  excitement.  If  there  has 
been  excitement,  it  has  been  out  of  doors3  among  such  as  did 
not  attend  Brother  Miller's  lectures. 


1-48  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

"  At  some  of  our  meetings,  since  Brother  M.  left,  as  many 
as  two  hundred  and  fifty,  it  has  been  estimated,  have  ex- 
pressed a  desire  for  religion,  by  coming  forward  for  prayers  : 
and  probably  between  one  and  two  hundred  have  professed 
conversion  at  our  meetings  ;  and  now  the  fire  is  being  kindled 
through  this  whole  city  and  ail  the  adjacent  country.  A 
number  of  rum-sellers  have  turned  their  shops  into  meeting- 
rooms,  and  those  places  that  were  once  devoted  to  intemper- 
ance and  revelry  are  now  devoted  to  prayer  and  praise. 
Others  have  abandoned  the  traffic  entirely,  and  are  become 
converted  to  God.  One  or  two  gambling  establishments.  I 
am  informed,  are  entirely  broken  up.  Infidels.  Deists,  Uni- 
versalists.  and  the  most  abandoned  profligates,  have  been 
converted. — some  who  had  not  been  to  the  house  of  worship 
for  years.  Prayer-meetings  have  been  established  in  every 
part  of  the  city,  by  the  different  denominations,  or  by  indi- 
viduals, and  at  almost  every  hour.  Being  down  in  the  busi- 
ness part  of  our  city,  on  the  4th  inst..  I  was  conducted  into 
a  room  over  one  of  the  banks,  where  I  found  about  thirty  or 
forty  men,  of  different  denominations,  engaged,  with  one 
accord,  in  prayer,  at  about  eleven  o'clock  in  the  day-time  ! 
In  short,  it  would  be  almost  impossible  to  give  an  adequate 
idea  of  the  interest  now  felt  in  the  city.  There  is  nothing 
like  extravagant  excitement,  but  an  almost  universal  solem- 
nity on  the  minds  of  all  the  people.  One  of  the  principal  book- 
sellers informed  me  that  he  had  sold  more  Bibles  in  one 
month,  since  Mr.  Miller  came  here,  than  he  had  in  any 
four  months  previous." 

An  article  in  the  Maine  •'•  TVesleyan  Journal' ?  gave  the 
following  account  of  his  person,  and  style  of  preaching  : 

"  Mr.  Miller  has  been  in  Portland,  lecturing  to  crowded 
congregations  in  Casco-street  Church,  on  his  favorite  theme, 
the  end  of  the  world,  or  literal  reign  of  Christ  for  one  thou- 
sand years.  As  faithful  chroniclers  of  passing  events,  it  will 
be  expected  of  us  that  we  should  say  something  of  the  man 
and  his  peculiar  views.  Mr.  Miller  is  about  sixty  years  of 
age  ;  a  plain  farmer,  from  Hampton,  in  the  State  of  Xew 
York.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Baptist  church  in  that  place, 
from  which  he  brings  satisfactory  testimonials  of  good  stand- 
mg,  and  a  license  to  improve  publicly.  He  has,  we  under- 
stand, numerous  testimonials,  also,  from  clergymen  of  different 


EXTRACT  FROM  THE  WESLEYAN   JOURNAL.  149 

denominations,  favorable  to  his  general  character.  We 
should  think  him  a  man  but  of  common-school  education; 
evidently  possessing  strong  powers  of  mind,  which,  for  about 
fourteen  years,  have  been  almost  exclusively  bent  to  the  in- 
vestigation of  Scripture  prophecies.  The  last  eight  years 
of  his  life  have  been  devoted  to  lecturing  on  this  favorite 
subject. 

"  In  his  public  discourse,  he  is  self-possessed  and  ready ; 
distinct  in  his  utterance,  and  frequently  quaint  in  his  ex- 
pressions. He  succeeds  in  chaining  the  attention  of  his  au- 
ditory from  an  hour  and  a  half  to  two  hours ;  and  in  the 
management  of  his  subject  discovers  much  tact,  holding  fre- 
quent colloquies  with  the  objector  and  inquirer,  supplying 
the  questions  and  answers  himself  in  a  very  natural  manner, 
and,  although  grave  himself,  sometimes  producing  a  smile 
from  a  portion  of  his  auditors. 

"  Mr.  Miller  is  a  great  stickler  for  literal  interpretations  ; 
never  admitting  the  figurative,  unless  absolutely  required  to 
make  correct  sense,  or  meet  the  event  which  is  intended  to 
be  pointed  out.  He  doubtless  believes,  most  unwaveringly, 
all  he  teaches  to  others.  His  lectures  are  interspersed  with 
powerful  admonitions  to  the  wicked,  and  he  handles  Univer- 
salism  with  gloves  of  steel." 

In  connection  with  the  foregoing  was  appended  a  statement 
of  Mr.  M.'s  opinions,  which  elicited  from  him  the  following 
comment  : 

"  In  all  the  cities  which  I  have  visited,  the  editors  of  reli- 
gious newspapers  have  almost  invariably  misstated  and 
ridiculed  my  views,  doctrines,  and  motives ;  but  in  Portland 
I  found,  as  I  honestly  believe,  an  honest  editor.  He  gave 
a  candid,  honest,  and  impartial  account." 

Mr.  Miller  was  strongly  urged  by  "  the  wardens  of  the 
First  Baptist  Society,  worshipping  in  Pleasant-street," 
wThere  he  lectured  a  portion  of  the  time,  to  give  them  "  an- 
other course  of  lectures,"  but  he  was  obliged  to  decline 
the  invitation  ;  and,  on  the  last  Tuesday  in  March,  left  Port- 
land, and  by  stage  and  railroad  reached  his  home  in  Low 
Hampton  on  Friday  night  following,  —  "  being  absent  from 
home  nearly  six  months,  and  having  delivered  three  hundred 
and  twenty-seven  lectures." 


150  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM    MILLER. 

On  his  way  home,  a  young  man.  dressed  in  black,  who, 
Mr.  M.  afterwards  learned,  was  a  clergyman  in  a  neighbor- 
ing town,  became  his  companion  for  a  short  distance  in  the 
stage.  The  young  man  was  very  talkative  respecting  the 
ministers  of  his  acquaintance. —  remarking  what  a  smooth 
preacher  A  was.  how  learned  B  was.  and  how  popular  C 
was.  fcc.  When  the  stage  stopped  for  the  passengers  to  dine. 
the  young  man  proved  to  be  an  acquaintance  of  the  land- 
lord's, and  they  commenced  conversation  respecting  "the 
prophet  Miller."  The  landlord  inquired  of  the  gentleman 
in  black  if  he  had  read  Mr.  Miller's  lectures,  which  the  for- 
mer had  loaned  him  a  few  days  previous.  "  No."  the  cler- 
gyman said.  "  he  read  the  introduction,  and  found  that  Mr. 
M.  was  not  a  learned  man.  and  therefore  he  had  no  confi- 
dence in  the  work."  This  reply  struck  Mr.  M.  with  much 
force,  as  evidence  of  the  manner  in  which  many  let  those 
reputed  to  be  learned  do  their  thinking  for  them. 

From  the  oth  to  the  29th  of  April,  he  lectured  in  Hamp- 
ton. X.  Y..  to  full  houses,  and  a  good  work  followed.  On 
the  2d  of  May  he  commenced  a  course  of  lectures  in  the 
Baptist  church  in  Benson.  \t..  and  lectured  there  and 
in  the  church  of  the  Rev.  Air.  Francis  (Orthodox)  nine 
days.  On  leaving  this  place.  Mr.  Miller  wrote  to  his  son  : 
"The  several  clergymen  in  the  town  met  with  us.  The 
Lord  came  down  in  his  power,  and  by  his  Spirit :  a 
influence  was  felt,  and  many  a  stout  heart  yielded  to  the 
gospel  of  Christ.  About  thirty  had  obtained  a  hope,  and 
about  one  hundred  more  were  anxious,  when  I  left." 

Mr.  Miller  next  visited  New  York  city,  and  commenced  his 
first  course  of  lectures  there,  from  the  16th  to  the  29th  of  May, 
at  the  corner  of  Norfolk  and  Broome  streets,  to  good  assem- 
blies. On  the  19th,  he  wrote  :  "  Last  night  we  had  a  solemn 
time.  An  anxious  and  deep  attention  was  given  by  the 
whole  congregation/*'  Considerable  interest  was  excited  by 
this  course,  and  the  ground  was  prepared  for    subse 

;s.  At  the  close  of  these  lectures.  Mr.  Miller  returned 
home,  where  he  remained  a  few  days,  and  then  made  another 
visit  to  Canada  East.  He  lectured  at  Hatly  on  the  21st  of 
June,  and  at  Bolton  on  the  24th.  On  the  28th  he  com- 
menced a  course  of  lectures  in  Georgeville.  winch  closed  on 


ETC.  151 

the  5th  of  July.  Writing  from  this  place,  on  the  29th  of 
June,  he  speaks  of  "large  congregations/"'  "  serious  atten- 
tion," and  of  the  prospect  "  that  much  good  would  be  done 
there."  He  then  returned  to  Low  Hampton,  where  he  lec- 
tured on  the  12th  of  July. 

He  remained  at  home  about  four  weeks,  when  he  visited 
Dresden,  X.  Y.,  and  lectured  from  the  9th  to  the  12th  of 
August.  Of  that  place  he  writes,  under  date  of  August 
loth:  "We  had  a  good  time:  the  Lord  was  there."  He 
then  adds  :  "  I  do  not  knowT  what  to  say  about  coming  to 
Massachusetts  again.  Day  after  to-morrow  I  begin  a  course 
of  lectures  at  Fort  Ann.  The  next  week  I  go  north,  where 
I  have  three  places,  which  will  take  three  weeks  at  least. 
I  have  more  business  on  hand  than  any  two  men  like  me 
should  perform.  I  must  lecture  twice  every  day.  I  must  con- 
verse with  many  —  answer  a  host  of  questions  —  write  an- 
swers to  letters  from  all  parts  of  the  compass,  from  Canada 
to  Florida,  from  Maine  to  Missouri.  I  must  read  all  the 
candid  arguments  (which  I  confess  are  not  many)  which 
are  urged  against  me.  I  must  read  all  the  slang  of  the 
drunken  and  sober.  .  .  The  polar  star  must  be  kept  in 
view ;  the  chart  consulted,  the  compass  watched ;  the 
reckoning  kept ;  the  sails  set ;  the  rudder  managed ;  the 
ship  cleared ;  the  sailors  fed ;  the  voyage  prosecuted ;  the 
port  of  rest,  to  which  we  are  destined,  understood ;  and  to 
the  watchman  call,  •  Watchman,  what  of  the  night?'  " 

On  the  loth  of  August,  1840,  he  commenced  his  antici- 
pated lectures  at  South  Bay,  in  the  town  of  Fort  Ann, 
N.  Y.j  and  continued  to  the  20th. 

On  the  2nd,  in  compliance  with  a  previous  invitation,  he 
commenced  a  second  course  of  lectures  in  Colchester,  Yt, 
which  terminated  on  the  29th.  Of  these  meetings  Elder 
Columbus  Green  thus  writes  : 

'"The  audiences  were  very  large,  notwithstanding  it  was 
a  time  of  great  excitement,  and  our  place  of  worship  was  as 
still  as  death.  His  lectures  were  delivered  in  the  most  kind 
and  affectionate  manner,  convincing  every  mind  that  he  be- 
lieved the  sentiments  he  uttered.  He  made  the  most  power- 
ful exhortations  that  I  ever  heard  fall  from  the  lips  of 
any  one.  A  deep  solemnity  pervaded  the  minds  of  the 
14 


152  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

community.  Young  men  and  maidens,  amid  the  pleas- 
ures of  early  years ;  men  in  the  meridian  of  life,  hurrying 
on  with  locomotive  speed  in  pursuit  of  the  treasures  of 
earth;  gray-haired  sires,  and  matrons  whose  hoary  locks 
gave  evidence  that  many  winters  had  passed  over  them,  all 
paused  and  pondered  on  the  things  they  heard,  inquiring, 
1  Am  I  ready  1 '  Many  came  to  the  conclusion  that  they 
were  unprepared  to  meet  their  Saviour,  repented  of  their 
sins,  and,  through  the  merits  of  Jesus,  obtained  pardon  full 
and  free.  For  two  years  after  this,  there  was  a  constant 
state  of  revival  in  that  place ;  and  many  were  the  souls  that 
dated  their  convictions  of  sin  at  that  time,  when  the  faithful 
old  man  warned  them  of  the  world's  approaching  doom.  No 
man  was  more  highly  esteemed  than  he  was ;  and  it  was  not 
uncommon  for  impenitent  men  to  vindicate  his  character 
when  his  motives  were  impeached. 

"  Many  there  regarded  him  as  'a  chosen  vessel  of  the 
Lord,'  who  had  been  instrumental  in  building  them  up  '  in 
the  most  holy  faith;'  who  had  taken  them,  as  it  were,  to 
Pisgah's  top,  and  shown  them  the  promised  land,  that  better 
country  for  which  patriarchs  and  prophets  sighed.  Among 
the  public  servants  of  the  Most  High,  to  them  most  dear, 
our  departed  brother  held  a  conspicuous  place.  Years  have 
passed  since  I  enjoyed  those  happy  seasons  with  them,  and 
swift-rolling  rivers  and  snow-capped  hill-tops  now  lie  between 
us.  But,  in  whatever  light  they  may  now  regard  the  efforts 
of  him  who  sleeps  in  death,  they  then  appreciated  them. 
For  one,  I  have  never  since  seen  the  time  when  I  was  not 
thankful  to  God  that  I  was  counted  worthy  to  see  the  light, 
and  rejoice  in  it.  And  my  prayer  is  that  the  torch  of  truth 
may  illume  our  path  through  time,  and  that  we  may  at  last 
have  an  abundant  entrance  into  the  everlasting  kingdom  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

"Montgomery,  Vt.:  March  14,  1850." 

Mr.  Miller  next  lectured  in  Burlington,  Vt.,  from  the 
30th  of  August  to  the  5th  of  September;  in  Salisbury,  Vt., 
from  the  12th  to  the  20th  of  September;  and  from  the  26th 
of  the  same  month  to  the  1st  of  October,  in  Sudbury,  Vt., 
after  which  he  returned  to  Low  Hampton. 

In  anticipation  of  attending  the  first  General  Conference 


HIS   SICKNESS.  153 

of  believers  in  the  second  coming  of  Christ,  which  was  to 
assemble  on  the  14th  of  October,  1840,  in  Boston,  Mr. 
Miller  left  home  on  the  8th,  and  proceeded  as  far  as  Fair- 
haven,  Yt,  about  two  miles  from  home,  where  he  was  taken 
with  a  severe  attack  of  typhoid  fever.  In  the  afternoon  of 
the  same  day  he  was  carried  back  to  Low  Hampton.  He 
was  thus  deprived  of  the  long-desired  privilege  of  meeting 
fellow-laborers  in  the  work  in  which  he  was  engaged.  On 
the  15th  of  October  he  was  able  to  dictate  a  few  lines  to 
those  assembled  in  conference,  as  follows  : 

....  "Why  was  I  deprived  of  meeting  those  con- 
genial minds  in  this  good,  this  glorious  cause  of  light  and 
truth  ?  Why  am  I  to  bear  this  last  affliction,  and  not  enjoy 
this  one  pleasure  of  meeting  fellow-laborers  in  a  cause  so 
big  with  prospects,  so  glorious  in  its  results,  so  honoring  to 
God,  and  so  safe  to  man '?  Why  are  the  providences  of  God 
so  mysterious  ?  I  have  often  inquired. .  Am  I  never  to  have 
my  will ?  No,  never,  until  my  will  shall  harmonize  with 
thine,  0  Father !  Yes,  God  is  right ;  his  providence  is 
right ;  his  ways  are  just  and  true ;  and  I  am  foolish  to  mur- 
mur or  complain. 

.  .  .  .  "  0,  I  had  vainly  hoped  to  see  you  all,  to 
breathe  and  feel  that  sacred  flame  of  love,  of  heavenly  fire ; 
to  hear  and  speak  of  that  dear  blessed  Saviour's  near  ap- 
proach !  .  .  .  But  here  I  am,  a  weak,  a  feeble,  toil- 
worn  old  man,  upon  a  bed  of  sickness,  with  feeble  nerves, 
and,  worse  than  all,  a  heart,  I  fear,  in  part  unreconciled  to 
God.  But  bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul !  I  have  great  bless- 
ings yet,  more  than  I  can  number.  I  was  not  taken  sick 
far  from  home.  I  am  in  the  bosom  of  my  family.  I  have 
my  reason ;  I  can  think,  believe,  and  love.  I  have  the 
Bible  —  0  blessed  book !  If  I  cannot  read,  I  have  a 
daughter  who  loves  that  book,  and  she  can  read  for  me. 
How  pleasant  it  is  to  hear  these  infant  voices  read  that  holy 
book  !  How  soft  the  couch  of  sickness  may  be  made  by 
dutiful  children  and  the  book  of  God  !  I  have  a  hope, —  yes, 
yes,  'a  blessed  hope/ — founded  on  that  Word  that  never  fails. 
My  hope  is  in  Him  who  soon  will  come,  and  will  not  tarry. 
I  love  the  thought ;  it  makes  my  bed  in  sickness ;  I  hope  it 
will  in  death.  I  wait  for  him.  My  soul,  wait  thou  on  God. 
I  have  the  Spirit ;  0  blessed  Holy  Spirit !     He  whispers  in 


154  LIFE    OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

my  heart,  '  Fear  not,  I  am  with  thee  ;  be  not  dismayed/  I 
will  sustain  thee.  I  have  a  promise  from  the  great  I  AM  : 
1  Though  after  my  skin,  worms  destroy  this  body,  yet  in  my 
flesh  shall  I  see  God.'  I  have  many  friends,  and  I  am  per- 
suaded they  will  last  forever.  I  am  confident  that  I  have 
daily  prayers  from  many  hearts."   .... 

When  sufficiently  restored,  he  returned  to  Fort  Ann,  and 
lectured  from  the  26th  to  the  30th  of  December,  1840,  in 
compliance  with  the  "  unanimous  invitation"  of  the  Baptist 
church  there,  Rev.  J.  0.  Mason  pastor,  who  had  despatched 
a  messenger  for  him.  From  the  2d  to  the  8th  of  January, 
1841,  he  lectured  at  Ballston  Spa,  N.  T. ;  and  again,  from 
the  9th  to  the  12th,  at  Fort  Ann. 


CHAPTER    X  I. 

LECTURES   IN   BOSTON    (4TH,    5TH,   AND    6TH   COURSES),    IN    ANDOVER, 

PROVIDENCE,  GAL  WAY,    N.    Y.,  CLAREMONT,    N.  H.,  BENSON,    VT. 

HIS     ILLNESS INCIDENT     AT     SANDY     HILL,    AT     WORCESTER 

THE    PHRENOLOGIST MEETINGS    AT    HARTFORD. 

Otf  the  31st  of  January,  1841,  Mr.  Miller  again  visited 
Boston,  and  commenced  his  fourth  course  of  lectures  in  that 
city.  He  continued  there  till  the  19th  of  February.  The 
first  eighteen  lectures  were  given  in  the  Chardon-street 
Chapel,  "  which  was  crowded  almost  to  suffocation,  and 
thousands  were  obliged  to  retire  for  want  of  room."  Begin- 
ning on  the  9th,  a  second  course  of  eighteen  lectures  was 
delivered,  by  invitation  of  the  Baptist  church  in  South  Bos- 
ton, Thomas  Driver  pastor. 

In  compliance  with  an  invitation  from  Rev.  N.  Hervey, 
pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  in  Andover,  Mass.,  Mr.  M. 
commenced  a  course  of  lectures  in  their  house  on  Sunday, 
February  21,  1841.  The  students  of  the  Orthodox  insti- 
tution there  requested  him  to  lecture  only  evenings,  that  they 
might  attend  his  full  course  ;  but  he  could  not  consistently 


LECTURES   IN   AND0VER.  155 

comply  with  their  wishes.  His  labors  continued  there  till 
March  2d,  and  were  attended  by  a  very  large  and  attentive 
audience.  Mr.  Hervey,  in  whose  church  they  were  delivered, 
has  given  the  following  sketch  of  them. 

'•His  exposition  of  the  prophecies,  together  with  his  ear- 
nest and  impressive  appeals  to  Christians  and  sinners  to  pre- 
pare for  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  were  the  means  of  arousing 
Christians  to  action,  and  of  the  conversion  of  a  number  of  per- 
sons, who  before  were  without  hope  and  without  God  in  the 
world.  In  the  course  of  the  lectures,  an  incident  occurred, 
which  shows  his  familiar  acquaintance  with  the  Scriptures  and 
promptness  to  meet  objectors  to  his  views.  About  the  fourth 
day  of  his  labors  he  received  a  letter,  signed  '  Anonymous/ 
containing  a  long  list  of  passages  from  the  Old  and  New 
Testaments,  wThich  wTere  evidently  quoted  by  '  Anonymous  ' 
from  memory 3  without  naming  their  chapter  and  verse. 
These  passages  were  thought  by  the  author  of  the  letter  to 
be  directly  opposed  to  Mr.  Miller's  view  of  the  near  approach 
and  personal  reign  of  Christ  on  earth.  To  these  texts  was 
affixed  a  single  question.  The  letter,  on  being  taken  from 
the  office,  was  presented  to  Mr.  Miller,  who  read  it  through, 
and  immediately  said :  l "  Anonymous ' '  has  not  quoted  a  single 
text  right.'  In  the  evening,  previous  to  his  lecture,  he  took 
the  letter  from  his  pocket,  and  inquired  if  there  was  a  person 
in  the  audience  by  the  name  of  Anonymous.  If  so,  he 
would  like  to  have  him  stand  up.  The  house  was  filled  on 
that  evening  by  a  large  congregation.  Mr.  Miller  waited 
some  time  for  the  appearance  of  'Anonymous;'  the  con- 
gregation remained  in  breathless  silence  to  see  the  stranger. 
But  no  one  answered  to  the  call.  Mr.  Miller  then  read  the 
letter,  and,  as  he  read  each  passage,  also  read  the  same 
from  the  Bible.  The  audience  were  satisfied  that  not  one 
text  was  correctly  quoted.  Mr.  Miller  again  repeated  the 
call  for  '  Anonymous  '  to  stand  up,  if  he  was  present.  No  one 
arose.  Mr.  Miller  then  read  the  question  which  closed  the 
letter,  namely  —  '  Mr.  Miller,  how  dare  you  assert  your 
theory  with  so  much  confidence  without  a  knowledge  of  the 
Hebrew  and  Greek  languages  1 '  To  this  Mr.  Miller 
promptly  replied,  i  If  I  am  not  acquainted  with  the 
Hebrew  and  Greek,  I  know  enough  to  quote  the  English 
texts  of  the  Scriptures  rightly.'  —  c  Anonymous  '  never  made 
14* 


156  LIFE    OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

himself  known,  and  it  was  the  impression  of  many  of  the  au- 
dience that  the  author  of  the  letter,  if  he  was  skilled  in  the 
Hebrew  and  Greek,  was  exceedingly  deficient  in  his  knowl- 
edge of  the  English  Scriptures. 

"  During  Mr.  Miller's  stay  in  Andover  several  persons 
called  to  converse  with  him  on  the  topics  of  his  lectures,  and 
he  was  very  ready  to  devote  his  time  to  conversation  with 
persons  desirous  of  receiving  information.  He  entered  into 
the  conversation  with  all  his  heart,  and  hundreds  will  remem- 
ber with  delight  and  devout  gratitude  to  God  the  interviews 
they  have  enjoyed  with  him,  and  the  instructions  they  have  re- 
ceived from  his  lips.  He  was  ever  ready  to  answer  all  reason- 
able questions,  and  could  generally  distinguish  between  the 
caviller  and  the  sincere  inquirer  after  truth.  Twro  young  men, 
who  were  in  the  course  of  study  at  the  Theological  Seminary 
at  Andover,  called  to  see  Mr.  Miller  while  at  the  house  of 
the  writer,  and  spent  some  time  in  conversation  with  him  upon 
the  Advent  of  Christ.  After  the  conversation,  as  they  were 
about  leaving,  one  of  the  young  men  asked  Mr.  Miller  the 
following  question  : 

'*  '  Well,  if  the  Lord  is  coming  so  soon,  Mr.  Miller,  what 
shall  ice  do  who  are  studying  for  the  ministry  ?  We  have 
some  time  yet  to  prepare  for  the  pastoral  office.' 

"  To  this  the  good  man  promptly  replied:  'Young  men,  if 
God  has  called  you  to  study,  keep  on  in  your  course,  and  I 
will  aid  you  all  in  my  power  ;  but  if  he  has  called  you  to 
preach,  study  your  Bibles,  and  commence  preaching  imme- 
diately.' 

"The  young  men  bade  their  adviser  good  day.     N.  H." 

From  the  3d  to  the  13th  of  March,  he  lectured  to  crowded 
audiences  at  the  Marlboro'  Chapel,  his  fifth  course  of  lec- 
tures in  Boston.  From  the  13th  to  the  19th  of  the  same 
month,  he  lectured  in  Fairhaven,  Mass.  ;  from  the  20th  to 
the  26th,  in  New  Bedford,  Mass.  ;  and  from  the  27th  of 
March  to  the  5th  of  April,  to  large  audiences  in  Providence, 
R.  I.  The  Town  Hall,  a  commodious  building,  was  granted 
by  the  City  Council  for  that  purpose.  On  Sunday,  the  4th, 
by  the  invitation  of  Rev.  Mr.  Jameson,  of  the  3d  Baptist 
Church,  he  lectured  there  all  day  to  full  and  solemn  congre- 
gations.   His  keeping  no  journal,  makes  it  impossible  to  give 


LECTURES   IN   NEW  YORK.   ETC.  157 


tlie  particular  results  of  these  lectures ;  but  in  each  of  the 
last  three  places  a  large  number  of  intelligent  members,  in 
the  several  churches,  embraced  his  views. 

From  the  8th  to  the  15th  of  April,  1841,  he  labored  in 
Lowell,  Mass.,  when,  after  an  absence  of  three  months,  he 
returned  home,  to  enjoy  a  season  of  rest.  At  this  time  he 
estimated  that,  since  the  1st  of  October,  1839,  he  had 
;i  travelled  four  thousand  five  hundred  and  sixty  miles,  and 
preached  six  hundred  and  twenty-seven  lectures,  averaging 
one  and  a  half  hours  each,  resulting  in  about  five  thousand 
hopeful  conversions." 

On  the  23d  of  May,  in  compliance  with  a  very  urgent 
request  from  Addison,  Vt.,  he  commenced  a  course  of  lectures 
there,  which  continued  till  the  30th,  when  he  was  taken  sick 
with  a  painful  inflammation  in  his  left  limb.  He  immediately 
returned  home,  when  the  other  limb  was  similarly  affected. 
This  terminated  in  painful  swellings  and  copious  discharges, 
which  began  to  heal  about  the  10th  of  June,  but  confined 
him  to  his  room  till  the  last  of  August;  so  that  he  rested 
from  labor  during  the  summer. 

From  the  12th  to  the  20th  of  September  he  lectured  in 
Hartford,  N".  Y.,  to  crowded  houses.  On  the  26th  of  Sep- 
tember, and  onward  to  October  6th,  he  lectured  at  Ballston, 
N.  Y. :  and,  on  the  10th  of  October,  he  commenced  a  course 
of  lectures  at  Gal  way,  N.  Y.,  which  closed  on  the  17th. 
With  these  lectures  a  revival  commenced,  which,  according 
to  a  letter  from  Rev.  Wm.  B.  Curtis,  pastor  of  the  Baptist 
church,  extended  into  the  neighboring  towns.  Under  date 
of  March  12th,  1842,  he  wrote  to  Mr.  Miller  as  follows  : 

;'  The  glorious  work  soon  became  general  and  powerful, 
and  we  continued  our  meetings  (including  the  week  you 
were  with  us)  eight  weeks,  with  only  a  day  or  two  intermis- 
sion. I  find  I  have  over  one  hundred  names  who  profess  to 
have  obtained  hope  in  the  pardoning  mercy  of  God.  Includ- 
ing those  converted  in  other  meetings  originating  from  this 
revival,  it  is  probable  that  from  one  hundred  and  fifty  to  two 
hundred  have  been  converted  to  God  in  this  vicinity  since 
your  labors  here.  In  justice  to  yourself  and  the  truth,  I 
must  say  that  the  extent  and  pow7er  of  this  glorious  revival 
was  greatly  promoted  by  your  lectures.  Many  converts 
date  their  first  impressions  from  hearing  you.     The  work 


158  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

has  prevailed  principally  in  the  Baptist,  Methodist,  and 
Christian  societies,  while  there  have  been  but  few  conver- 
sions among  the  Presbyterians,  who  stood  aloof  from  you 
when  here.5; 

On  the  18th  of  October  he  returned  to  Low  Hampton, 
and  presided  at  a  conference  of  Second  Advent  believers, 
which  assembled  in  the  Baptist  church  there,  from  the  2d  to 
the  5th  of  November,  1841. 

On  the  10th  of  November,  in  compliance  with  an  invita- 
tion numerously  signed,  he  commenced  a  course  of  lectures 
in  the  town-house  at  Claremont,  N.  H.,  and  continued  to 
the  18th.  A  letter,  signed  ' '  J.  Andrews, ' '  written  soon  after, 
states  that,  "  Now  all  the  town  is  aroused  to  the  subject  of 
religion.  The  Baptist,  Methodist,  and  Congregational  socie- 
ties are  all  united  in  this  work.  Some  are  converted,  and 
from  sixty  to  seventy-five  are  anxiously  seeking  the  Lord.'7 

On  the  14th  of  November,  the  First  Baptist  Church,  Mr. 
Parker  pastor,  in  Cambridgeport,  Mass.,  voted  unanimously 
to  renew  an  invitation,  which  they  had  some  time  before 
extended  to  Mr.  Miller,  and  with  which  he  had  been  unable 
to  comply,  to  give  a  course  of  lectures  there.  In  compliance 
with  that  request,  he  made  arrangements  to  commence  there 
on  Sunday,  the  21st  of  November ;  but,  in  consequence  of 
the  breaking  down  of  the  stage  on  Saturday,  he  was  detained 
in  Nashua  over  the  Sabbath,  and  gave  three  lectures  to  the 
citizens  of  that  place.  He  reached  Cambridgeport  on  the 
23d,  and  continued  till  the  28th.  On  the  day  following,  he 
commenced  his  sixth  course  of  lectures  in  Boston,  at  Boyls- 
ton  Hall,  where  he  addressed  large  audiences  each  day  and 
evening  till  the  9th  of  December. 

These  repeated  series  of  discourses  in  Boston  had  a  pow- 
erful effect  on  the  community.  As  usual,  large  numbers 
went  away,  unable  to  gain  admittance,  and  many  were  hope- 
fully converted  from  sin  to  holiness.  This  last  was  a  com- 
mon feature  in  all  his  labors,  and  was  one  great  reason  why 
calls  from  those  who  did  not  entertain  his  views  were  so 
frequent  and  urgent.  This  reason  is  given  in  an  invitation 
extended  to  him  by  the  Baptist  church  in  NewT  Ipswich,  N. 
H.,  November  29th,  1841.  Their  pastor,  J.  M.  Willmarth, 
thus  writes  :  "  The  majority  desire  you  to  come,  principally 
because  they  have  understood  that  your  addresses  to  sinners 


A  lawyer's  opinion.  159 

are  plain  and  pungent,  and  frequently  attended  with  the 
divine  blessing  in  the  conversion  of  souls." 

A  course  of  lectures  in  Dover,  N.  H.,  continuing  from 
the  11th  to  the  19th  of  December,  terminated  his  labors  for 
the  year  1841. 

From  the  8th  to  the  16th  of  January,  1842,  he  lectured 
at  Fonday's  Bush,  N.  Y.;  from  the  17th  to  the  26th  of 
January,  in  Jamesville,  N.  Y. ;  and,  from  the  27th  of 
January  to  the  3d  of  February,  in  the  Presbyterian  church 
at  Sandy  Hill,  N.  Y.  A  conference  of  Advent  believers 
was  held  in  this  church,  commencing  on  the  1st  of  February 
and  closing  on  the  4th.  The  services  were  held  the  last 
evening  at  the  court-house.  On  that  occasion  about  one 
hundred  persons  arose  for  prayer,  and  a  revival  commenced 
which  continued  for  weeks.  On  this  evening  an  incident 
occurred  which  did  much  to  deepen  the  impressions  made  by 
the  lecture.  H.  B.  Northop,  Esq.,  a  prominent  lawyer  of 
that  county,  arose,  at  the  close  of  the  meeting,  and  remarked 
that  "  he  had  stood  at  that  bar  many  times  and  addressed  a 
jury  of  twelve  sensible  men,  presenting  evidence  and  argu- 
ments which  he  knew  were  weak  and  fallacious,  and  he 
knew  others  might  have  seen  it ;  but  he  had  sat  down  with 
the  confident  expectation  that  those  twelve  men  would  give 
him  their  verdict.  He  had  attended  these  lectures,  and 
had  done  it  with  a  mind  strongly  predisposed  to  reject  the 
doctrine,  and  exceedingly  sceptical.  He  had  attended  with 
a  determination,  if  possible,  to  overthrow  the  theory,  and  to 
exult  with  a  feeling  of  triumph  if  he  succeeded.  He  had 
watched  every  word  and  sentence,  and  made  an  effort  at 
every  point  where  he  thought  there  was  a  possibility  of 
making  a  breach ;  but  had  been  unable  to  do  it.  And  now, 
after  making  himself  acquainted  with  history,  sacred  and 
profane,  with  prophecies  and  prophetic  periods,  so  far  as  his 
circumstances  would  permit  him  to  do,  he  would  frankly 
confess  that  he  had  never  found  any  theory  that  would  com- 
pare with  this  for  strength  of  evidence.  He  would  not  say 
he  believed  the  event  would  come  in  1843,  or  within  ten 
years  of  that ;  but  he  could  see  no  reason  why  it  would  not 
take  place  then !  At  any  rate,  he  was  satisfied,  if  there 
was  any  truth  in  the  Bible3  the  event  was  near ;  and  this  is 


160  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM  MILLER. 

the  nearest  calculation  we  can  possibly  come  to  respecting 
the  time.5' 

The  effect  of  such  a  declaration,  from  such  a  source,  can 
be  better  imagined  than  described.  Rev.  Seth  Ewer,  in  a 
letter  of  the  2d  of  March  following,  wrote  : 

"For  about  four  weeks  we  continued  meetings,  day  and 
evening.  .  .  .  We  find  new  cases  of  conviction  daily,  and 
frequent  hopeful  conversions.  Our  house  of  worship  is 
thronged  every  evening.  Last  Sabbath  evening  the  question 
was  put,  whether  they  wished  to  continue  the  services ;  and 
hundreds  arose  in  the  affirmative.  .  .  .  Between  fifty  and 
sixty  profess  to  have  obtained  a  hope." 

From  the  12th  of  February,  1842,  to  the  17th,  he  lec- 
tured in  Benson,  Vt.  At  the  close  of  this  meeting  he  took 
a  violent  cold,  which  prevented  him  from  speaking  for  a  few 
days.  He  commenced  a  course  of  lectures  at  Nashua,  N. 
H.,  on  the  24th  of  February;  but,  after  speaking  a  few 
times  to  crowded  houses,  the  state  of  his  lungs,  and  the  want 
of  a  suitable  place  to  speak  in,  compelled  him  to  relinquish 
his  labors  there  on  the  third  day. 

From  the  6th  to  the  9th  of  March,  Mr.  Miller  lectured  in 
Medford,  Mass.  While  here  a  friend  took  him  to  a  phre- 
nologist in  Boston,  with  whom  he  was  himself  acquainted,  but 
who  had  no  suspicion  whose  head  he  was  about  to  examine. 
The  phrenologist  commenced  by  saying  that  the  person 
under  examination  had  a  large,  well-developed,  and  well- 
balanced  head.  While  examining  the  moral  and  intellectual 
organs,  he  said  to  Mr.  Miller's  friend  : 

"  I  tell  you  what  it  is,  Mr.  Miller  could  not  easily  make 
a  convert  of  this  man  to  his  hair-brained  theory.  He  has 
too  much  good  sense." 

Thus  he  proceeded,  making  comparisons  between  the  head 
he  was  examining  and  the  head  of  Mr.  Miller,  as  he  fancied 
it  would  be. 

"  0,  how  I  should  like  to  examine  Mr.  Miller's  head  !  " 
said  he ;   "I  would  give  it  one  squeezing." 

The  phrenologist,  knowing  that  the  gentleman  was  a  par- 
ticular friend  of  Mr.  Miller,  spared  no  pains  in  going  out 
of  the  way  to  make  remarks  upon  him.  Putting  his  hand 
on  the  organ  of  marvellousness,  he  said  :  "  There  !  I  '11  bet 
you  anything  that  old  Miller  has  got  a  bump  on  his  head 


PHRENOLOGICAL   EXAMINATION.  161 

there  as  big  as  my  fist;"  at  the  same  time  doubling  up  his 
fist  as  an  illustration. 

The  others  present  laughed  at  the  perfection  of  the  joke, 
and  he  heartily  joined  them,  supposing  they  were  laughing 
at  his  witticisms  on  Mr.  Miller. 

"  He  laughed;  ;t  was  well.     The  tale  applied 
Soon  made  him  laugh  on  t'  other  side." 

He  pronounced  the  head  of  the  gentleman  under  examina- 
tion the  reverse,  in  every  particular,  of  what  he  declared 
Mr.  Miller's  must  be.  When  through,  he  made  out  his 
chart,  and  politely  asked  Mr.  Miller  his  name. 

Mr.  Miller  said  it  was  of  no  consequence  about  putting 
his  name  upon  the  chart ;  but  the  phrenologist  insisted. 

;:  Very  well,"  said  Mr.  M. :  "  you  may  call  it  Miller,  if 
you  choose." 

"  Miller,  Miller"  said  he  :   "  what  is  your  first  name?  " 

<:  They  call  me  William  Miller." 

11  What !  the  gentleman  who  is  lecturing  on  the  prophe- 
cies?" 

11  Yes,  sir,  the  same." 

At  this  the  phrenologist  settled  back  in  his  chair,  the 
personation  of  astonishment  and  dismay,  and  spoke  not  a 
word  while  the  company  remained.  His  feelings  may  be 
more  easily  imagined  than  described. 

The  following  description  of  Mr.  Miller's  phrenological 
developments  were  furnished  by  a  phrenological  friend  in 
1842.  and  may  be  of  some  interest  to  those  acquainted  with 
that  science  : 

Organs  very  large.  —  Amativeness,  Adhesiveness, 
Combativeness,  Firmness,  Conscientiousness,  Benevolence, 
Constructiveness,  Ideality,  Calculation,  Comparison. 

Large.  —  Philoprogenitiveness,  Alimentiveness,  Acquisi- 
tiveness. Self-esteem,  Imitation,  Mirthfulness,  Form,  Size, 
Order,  Locality,  Eventuality,  Time,  Language,  Causality. 

Full.  —  Inhabitiveness,  Concentrativeness,  Caution,  Ap- 
probation, Wonder,  Veneration,  Weight,  Color,  Tune. 

Moderate.  —  Marvellousness,  Secretiveness,  Hope,  In- 
dividuality. 

From  the  12th  to  the  20th  of  March  he  lectured  in  the 
Town  Hall  in  Worcester,  Mass.     The  meetings  were  well 


162  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

attended, —  the  hall  being  crowded  during  most  of  the  time ; 
two  thousand  people  were  judged  to  have  been  present.  While 
explaining  the  7th  chapter  of  Daniel,  Mr.  M.  very  signifi- 
cantly inquired  how  there  could  be  a  millennium,  according 
to  the  common  understanding  of  it,  while  the  Little  Horn 
wrarred  with  the  saints,  which  he  was  to  do  till  the  coming  of 
the  Ancient  of  Days  1  A  Baptist  clergyman  arose,  and  of- 
fered to  answer  that  question  the  following  morning.  The  next 
morning  he  came  in  and  requested  additional  time,  and  his 
answer  was  postponed  another  day.  When  that  time  arrived 
he  came  in  and  presented  the  common  view  respecting  the 
millennium,  and  inquired  if  there  was  no  wTay  to  harmonize 
that  text  with  it.  Mr.  M.  said,  that  was  what  they  were 
waiting  for  him  to  do  !  But  he  left  it  there.  This  caused 
Mr.  M.  to  be  listened  to  with  more  than  usual  interest.  A 
revival  attended  his  labors,  and  considerable  effect  was  pro- 
duced on  the  public  mind. 

From  the  22d  to  the  28th,  he  lectured  in  the  City  Hall  in 
Hartford,  Ct.  From  two  hundred  to  three  hundred  persons 
in  that  city  became  favorable  to  his  views  as  the  result  of 
those  lectures.  Mr.  M.  was  prevented  from  giving  his  whole 
course  of  lectures,  on  this  occasion,  by  a  severe  attack  of 
catarrh  and  influenza,  w7hich  made  him  unable  to  proceed. 
The  Hartford  "  Christian  Secretary,"  a  Baptist  periodical, 
said  of  these  meetings  : 

li  One  fact  connected  with  this  conference  struck  us  some- 
what forcibly ;  and  that  was,  the  immense  crowd  which  at- 
tended the  whole  course  of  lectures.  We  are  unable  to  speak 
of  the  attendance  during  the  day,  but  in  the  evening  the  large 
hall  was  filled  to  overflowing  with  attentive  listeners.  Prob- 
ably not  less  than  from  fifteen  hundred  to  two  thousand  per- 
sons wTere  in  attendance  every  evening.  This  large  mass  of 
hearers  was  made  up  from  nearly  or  quite  every  congrega- 
tion in  the  city.  How  many  of  them  have  become  converts 
to  this  new  doctrine  wTe  have  no  means  of  judging,  but  pre- 
sume the  number  is  not  very  small.  Of  one  thing  we  are 
satisfied,  and  that  is  this  :  unless  the  clergy,  generally,  pre- 
sent a  better  theory  than  the  one  offered  by  Mr.  Miller,  the 
doctrine  will  prevail  to  a  very  general  extent." 

It  was  on  this  occasion  that  the  writer  of  this  became  con- 
vinced that  the  Second  Advent  is  to  be  pre-millennial ;  and 


LECTURES   IN   NEW   YORK,    NEWARK,    ETC.  163 

the  first  resurrection,  a  "  resurrection  out  from  among  the 
dead."  At  the  close  of  these  labors  Mr.  M.  returned  to 
Low  Hampton,  for  that  rest  which  his  over-tasked  frame 
now  greatly  needed. 


CHAPTER     XII. 

LECTURES    IN    NEW    YORK NEWARK  —  SARATOGA  —  NEWBURYPORT 

PALMER THE   EAST    KINGSTON    CAMP-MEETING BRANDON 

BENSON  —  CHICKOPEE NEW    HAVEN,    ETC. 

On  the  24th  of  April  he  commenced  a  course  of  lectures 
in  the  large  hall  of  the  Apollo,  410  Broadway,  in  the  city 
of  New  York,  as  usual  to  large  audiences,  closing  on  the 
10th  of  May/ 

On  the  7th  of  May,  he  visited  Newark,  N.  J.,  and  gave 
two  discourses  in  the  Universalist  chapel  in  that  city.  In 
compliance  with  three  very  urgent  requests  from  Rev. 
Joshua  Fletcher,  pastor,  and  the  unanimous  vote  of  the  Bap- 
tist church,  in  Saratoga,  N.  Y.,  Mr.  M.  again  visited  that 
place,  and  lectured  from  the  14th  to  the  22d  of  May.  From 
the  24th  to  the  28th  of  May,  he  gave  his  seventh  course  of 
lectures  in  Boston  :  and  from  the  29th  of  May  to  the  3d  of 
June,  1842,  he  lectured  in  Newburyport,  Mass.  At  the 
commencement  of  his  lecture,  in  the  evening  of  the  first  day, 
an  egg  was  thrown  into  the  hall,  at  him,  but  fell  upon  the  side 
of  the  desk.  At  the  close,  stones  were  thrown  through  the 
windows,  by  a  mob  outside,  who  indulged  in  some  character- 
istic hootings  and  kindred  noises.  The  congregation  dis- 
persed without  damage,  save  the  glass  of  lamps  and  windows. 
Under  those  circumstances,  the  town  authorities  closed  the 
hall,  and  the  lectures  were  adjourned  to  the  chapel  in  Hale's 
Court,  They  continued  till  Friday,  June  3d  —  a  goodly 
number  having  received  Christ  to  the  joy  of  their  souls. 

From  the  4th  to  the  12th  of  June,  he  gave  a  second  course 
of  lectures  in  the  Casco-street  church,  Portland,  Me.  They 
were  attended  by  crowds  of  anxious  hearers,  and  many  Chris- 
tians were  refreshed,  while  some  sinners  were  converted  to 
God.  From  the  16th  to  the  26th  of  June,  he  lectured  at 
15 


164  LIFE     OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

Three  Rivers  (in  Palmer,  Mass.)  A  member  of  the  Bap- 
tist church  there  afterwards  wrote,  through  the  "  Christian 
Reflector,"  the  organ  of  that  denomination,  as  follows  : 

"Dear  Brother  Graves:  —  It  is  with  gratitude  to 
God  that  I  am  able  to  turn  aside  from  the  joyful  scenes 
around  me,  to  inform  the  friends  in  Zion  what  God  hath 
wrought  for  us.  Rev.  William  Miller,  on  the  16th  of  June 
last,  commenced  a  course  of  lectures  on  the  Second  Advent 
of  Christ  to  this  world  in  1843.  The  lectures  were  delivered 
in  our  meeting-house,  which,  however,  would  hold  but  a 
small  part  of  the  audience,  it  being  estimated  at  five  thou- 
sand; and  notwithstanding  prepossessions,  prejudices,  and 
the  slanderous  reports  circulated  about  this  man  of  God,  the 
people  gave  heed  to  the  word  spoken,  and  seemed  determined 
to  examine  the  Scriptures,  to  see  if  these  things  were  so ; 
and  deep  solemnity  pervaded  the  vast  assembly.  The  chil- 
dren of  God  were  soon  aroused  to  a  sense  of  their  duty ;  sin- 
ners were  seen  weeping,  and  heard  to  say,  i  Pray  for  me  ! ' 
The  number  increased,  until  one  hundred,  in  an  evening 
prayer-meeting,  were  seen  to  arise  to  be  remembered  in  the 
prayers  of  the  saints.  Soon  converts  began  to  tell  us  what 
the  Lord  had  done  for  them.  Some  Deists,  some  TJniversal- 
ists,  and  many  of  the  thoughtless,  of  both  the  middle-aged 
and  the  youthful  part  of  the  community,  have  been  brought 
to  submit  their  hearts  to  God,  and  are  now  waiting  for  and 
hasting  to  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God.  As  to  the  char- 
acter of  the  work,  let  me  say,  I  have  never  seen  a  more 
thorough  conviction  of  the  total  depravity  of  the  heart,  and 
the  utter  helplessness  of  the  sinner,  and  that,  if  saved,  it 
must  be  by  the  sovereign  grace  of  God,  than  has  been  mani- 
fest in  all  that  have  given  a  relation  of  their  experience." 

On  the  29th  of  June,  1842,  Mr.  M.  commenced  a  course 
of  lectures  on  the  camp  ground  at  East  Kingston,  N.  H. 
This  was  the  first  camp-meeting  held  by  believers  in  the 
Advent  near,  and  was  noticed  by  a  writer  in  the  Boston  Post 
as  follows  : 

"  The  Second  Advent  camp-meeting,  which  commenced 
at  East  Kingston,  N.  H.,  on  Tuesday,  June  29th,  and  con- 
tinued from  day  to  day  until  Tuesday  noon,  July  5th;  was 


DESCRIPTION   BY   J.    G.    WHITTIER.  165 

attended  by  an  immense  concourse  of  people,  variously  esti- 
mated at  from  seven  to  ten  thousand 

"  The  meeting  was  conducted  with  great  regularity  and 
good  order  from  beginning  to  end.  The  ladies  were  seatod 
on  one  side,  and  the  gentlemen  on  the  other,  of  the  speaker ; 
meals  were  served  uniformly  and  punctually  at  the  times 
appointed,  and  the  same  punctuality  was  observed  as  to  the 
hours  appointed  for  the  services. 

'  *  The  preachers  were  twelve  or  fifteen.  Mr.  Miller  gave 
the  only  regular  course  of  lectures  —  the  others  speaking 
occasionally.  Many  of  the  people,  without  doubt,  assembled 
from  motives  of  curiosity  merely  ;  but  the  great  body  of  them, 
from  their  solemn  looks  and  close  attention  to  the  subject, 
w^ere  evidently  actuated  by  higher  and  more  important  mo- 
tives. Each  tent  was  under  the  supervision  of  a  tent-mas- 
ter, who  was  responsible  for  the  good  order  within  the  same, 
where  religious  exercises  were  kept  up  at  the  intermissions 
between  the  public  exercises  and  meals,  and  where  lights 
were  kept  burning  through  the  night. 

"  Some  fault  was  found,  or  dissatisfaction  felt,  with  that 
part  of  the  regulations  which  precluded  all  controversy  —  i.  e., 
which  prevented  people  of  opposite  theological  sentiments 
from  occupying  the  time  or  distracting  the  attention  of  the 
audience,  which  would  otherwise  have  introduced  confusion 
and  defeated  the  object  of  the  meeting.  Nothing  could  be 
more  reasonable  than  this  regulation,  and  no  peace-loving 
person  would  make  any  objection.  .  .  .  The  meeting 
broke  up  with  harmony  and  good  feeling." 

A  few  years  later,  a  distinguished  American  writer  and 
poet,  J.  Gr.  Whittier,  who  was  present  at  this  meeting,  made 
the  following  reference  to  it : 

' l  Three  or  four  years  ago,  on  my  way  eastward,  I  spent 
an  hour  or  two  at  a  camp  ground  of  the  Second  Advent  in 
East  Kingston.  The  spot  was  well  chosen.  A  tall  growth 
of  pine  and  hemlock  threw  its  melancholy  shadow  over  the 
multitude,  who  were  arranged  upon  rough  seats  of  boards 
and  logs.  Several  hundred  —  perhaps  a  thousand  —  people 
were  present,  and  more  were  rapidly  coming.  Drawn  about 
in  a  circle,  forming  a  background  of  snowy  whiteness  to  the 
dark  masses  of  men  and  foliage,  were  the  white  tents,  and 


LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

back  of  them  the  provision  stalls  and  cook  shot?.     When  I 

the  ground,  a  hymn,  the  words  of  which  I  could  not 

distinguish,  was  pealing  through  ::e  dim  a:^;  if  the  forest 

I  kn:      d  thing    :  nro  a      havhi  g  nc ither   ear  nor  taste  for  it 

—  but  I  rouldrea  Hy  see  that  it  had  its  ::::-  opon  die  mul- 
titude before  me.  kmdling  fee  higher  intensity  their  aires  ry 
excited  enthusiasm.  The  preachers  were  placed  in  a  rade 
pulp::    ;:  rough  boards     sarpeted    jnry  by  the  dead  forest 

a  and  Bowers,  and  fcasselled  not  with  silk  an;',  velvet 
v.:  ^ith  the  green  boughs  ;:  the  sombre  hemlocks  around 
it  One  of  them  followed  the  musi;  in  m  earnest  exhorta- 
tion on  the  duty  of  preparing  fin- the  great  event  Occa- 
sionally he  was  reafly  eloquent]  imd  hie  -  ription  of  the 
last  dav  had  all  the  terrible  distinctness  ::  Anellis  painting 
of  Ike  <End  of  the  World.' 

■•  Suspended  from  the  front  of  the  rude  pulpit  were  two 
broad  sheets  ::'  sanvass,  upon  one  of  which  was  die  ::_  ireof 
a  man. —  the  head  of  gold^  the  breast  and  arms  of  auve*; 
the  belly  of  bra  33,  die  legs  ::  iron,  and  feet  ::"  sbty, —  the 
dream  of  Xebuchadnezzar  !  On  die  :  thex  weare  . :  :  :  :ei  the 
wonders  ::  the  Apocalyptic  vision  —  die  t  -.  .zr.\  —  the  irag- 
>ns — the  scarlet  woman  ^::  by  the  seel  ::  Patmos  — 
oriental  types  and  figures  and  mystic  syml  >1e  translated  into 
staring  Yankee realhaea  and  exhibited  like  theteaate  ::  1 
travelling  menagerie  One  horrible  image,  with  its  :  ieous 
heads  and  scaly  caudal  extremity,  reminded  roc  jfthe  tre- 
mendous line  ::  MfltoiL  who3  in  speaking  ;:  die  Htne  evil 
hagon    lescribes  him  as 

•  S "whirring  :he  $::..-  h:rr:r=  ::hii  ii'.izi  vail. ' 

"To  an  imaginative  mind  the  scene  was  full  ;:'  novel  in- 
terest     The  white  circle  of  lends  —  :he  dim  wood  arches  — 
the  upturn-:- :'..  earnest  laces —  the  loud  voices  jfthes] 
burdened  with  the  awful  symbolic  language  ::  the  Bible  — 
the  smoke  from  the  fires  rising  lik :  :: :  m  forest  a! 

—  carrying  one  back  to  the  lays  -'-  primitive  worshi]  .  \ 

1  The  :::"-  were  >:  I's  irs:  veravies.  ere  ner  learaei 
I:  hew  vae  shaft,  ind  laj  vhe  arcMtraTe, 

And  stretch  the  roe:  cbr^e  iv.  *  *; 

Their  weie  near  thirty  tents  on  the  ground,  and  the  in- 
terest of  the  meeting  continued  to  the  last.     Mr.  Miller  left 


LECTURES   IN   BRANDON,    CASTINE,    NEWARK.        167 

the  ground  on  the  4th  of  July,  for  Northampton,  Mass., 
where  he  lectured  from  the  5th  to  the  7th,  and  then  pro- 
ceeded to  Low  Hampton. 

He  remained  at  home  till  past  the  middle  of  August.  On 
the  20th  of  that  month  he  commenced  a  course  of  lectures 
at  Brandon,  Vt.,  which  continued  till  the  28th.  On  the 
25th,  a  large  tent  had  been  pitched  at  Chicopee,  Mass., 
where  Mr.  Miller  was  anxiously  expected ;  but  he  did  not 
arrive  so  as  to  commence  his  lectures  till  the  1st  of  Septem- 
ber. He  then  lectured  each  day  till  the  4th,  when  the  meet- 
ing closed.  That  was  a  very  large  gathering,  and,  as  was 
estimated,  some  four  hundred  or  more  found  peace  in  believ- 
ing- 

From  the  7th  to  the  11th  of  September,  he  lectured  at 
Castine,  Maine.  On  returning  to  Boston,  on  the  12th,  at 
the  request  of  the  passengers,  he  gave  a  lecture  on  the  boat. 
He  went  to  Albany  on  the  13th,  lectured  there  in  the  even- 
ing, and  on  the  next  day  took  the  canal-boat,  on  which  he 
also  lectured,  on  his  way  to  Granville,  N.  Y.,  where  he  lec- 
tured from  the  18th  to  the  23d  of  September.  From  the 
8th  to  the  16th  of  October,  he  lectured  in  Whitehall,  N.  Y., 
and  from  the  20th  to  the  30th,  at  Benson,  Vt,,  where  Mr. 
Himes  held  a  tent-meeting  in  connection  with  his  lectures. 

On  the  3d  of  November,  Mr.  Himes  erected  the  Big 
Tent  in  Newark,  N.  J.  Mr.  Miller  was  not  able  to  be 
present  till  the  7th,  from  which  time  to  the  14th  he  gave 
fifteen  discourses.  Five  days  before  the  close  of  that  meet- 
ing the  weather  became  so  inclement  that  the  meetings 
could  not  be  continued  in  the  tent,  and  they  were  adjourned 
to  the  Presbyterian  church  in  Clinton-street,  which  was 
kindly  opened  during  the  week.  On  Sunday,  the  13th,  the 
meeting  was  held  in  the  morning  in  Mechanic's  Hall,  which 
was  crowded  to  suffocation,  and  found  to  be  altogether  too  strait 
for  them.  At  2  P.  M.,  Mr.  Miller  spoke  from  the  steps  of 
the  court-house  to  near  five  thousand  people.  Notwith- 
standing the  inclemency  of  the  weather,  and  their  being  thus 
driven  from  pillar  to  post,  the  meetings  were  very  interest- 
ing, and  were  productive  of  much  good. 

At  the  close  of  the  meeting  in  Newark,  he  commenced 
a  course  of  lectures  in  New  York  city,  which  continued 
till  the  18th  of  November.  On  the  19th  of  Novem- 
15* 


168  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

ber,  he  commenced  a  course  of  lectures  in  New  Haven,  Ct, 
in  the  M.  E.  Church,  Rev.  Mr.  Law  pastor.  On  Sunday, 
the  20th,  although  the  house  was  large,  it  was  crowded ;  and 
in  the  evening  many  were  unable  to  gain  admittance.  He 
continued  there  till  the  26th,  the  interest  continuing  during 
the  entire  course.  "  The  Fountain,"  a  temperance  paper 
published  in  that  city,  gave  the  following  account  of  the 
meeting  : 

"  Mr.  William  Miller,  the  celebrated  writer  and  lecturer 
on  the  Second  Advent  of  our  Saviour,  and  the  speedy 
destruction  of  the  world,  has  recently  visited  our  city,  and 
delivered  a  course  of  lectures  to  an  immense  concourse  of 
eager  listeners  in  the  First  Methodist  Church.  It  is  esti- 
mated that  not  less  than  three  thousand  persons  were  in 
attendance  at  the  church,  on  each  evening,  for  a  week ;  and  if 
the  almost  breathless  silence  which  reigned  throughout  the 
immense  throng  for  two  or  three  hours  at  a  time  is  any  evi- 
dence of  interest  in  the  subject  of  the  lectures,  it  cannot  be 
said  that  our  community  are  devoid  of  feeling  on  this 
momentous  question. 

"  Mr.  Miller  was  accompanied  and  assisted  by  Rev.  J.  V. 
Himes,  who  is  by  no  means  an  inefficient  coadjutor  in  this 
great  and  important  work.  We  did  not  attend  the  whole 
course,  the  last  three  lectures  being  all  we  had  an  oppor- 
tunity of  hearing.  We  were  utterly  disappointed.  So  many 
extravagant  things  had  been  said  of  the  l  fanatics '  in  the 
public  prints,  and  such  distorted  statements  published  in 
reference  to  their  articles  of  faith,  that  we  were  prepared  to 
witness  disgusting  and  perhaps  blasphemous  exhibitions  of 
1  Millerism,'  as  the  doctrine  of  the  Second  Advent  is  called. 

"  In  justice  to  Mr.  Miller  we  are  constrained  to  say,  that 
he  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  lecturers  we  have  any  recol- 
lection of  ever  having  heard.  We  have  not  the  least  doubt 
that  he  is  fully  convinced  of  the  truth  of  the  doctrine  he 
labors  so  diligently  to  inculcate,  and  he  certainly  evinces 
great  candor  and  fairness  in  his  manner  of  proving  his  points. 
And  he  proves  them,  too,  to  the  satisfaction  of  every  hearer; 
—  that  is,  allowing  his  premises  to  be  correct,  there  is  no 
getting  away  from  his  conclusions. 

"  There  was  quite  a  number  of  believers  in  attendance  from 
other  places,  and  a  happier  company  we  have  never  seen. 


CORRESPONDENCE.  169 

We  have  no  means  of  ascertaining  the  precise  effect  of  these 
meetings  on  this  community,  but  we  know  that  many  minds 
have  been  induced  to  contemplate  the  Scripture  prophecies 
in  a  new  light,  and  not  a  few  are  studying  the  Bible  with 
unwonted  interest.  For  our  own  part,  this  new  view  of  the 
world's  destiny  is  so  completely  at  variance  with  previous 
habits  of  thought  and  anticipation,  that  we  are  not  prepared 
to  give  it  entire  credence,  though  we  should  not  dare  hazard 
an  attempt  to  disprove  it. 

"  The  best  part  of  the  story  is,  that  a  powerful  revival  has 
followed  the  labors  of  Messrs.  Miller  and  company.  We  learn 
that  over  fifty  persons  presented  themselves  for  prayers 
at  the  altar  of  the  Methodist  church  on  Sunday  evening. 
On  Monday  evening  the  number  was  about  eighty." 

In  the  month  of  May  following,  Rev.  A.  A.  Stevens 
(Orthodox  Cong.),  then  a  member  of  Yale  College,  in  a  let- 
ter to  the  "  Midnight  Cry,"  stated  that  "  the  powerful  and 
glorious  revival  which  then  commenced  continued  for  some 
two  months,  with  almost  unabated  interest." 

At  the  close  of  these  lectures,  Mr.  M.  returned  to  New 
York  city,  where  he  gave  six  discourses,  from  the  27th  to 
the  29th  of  November,  and  then  returned  to  Low  Hampton. 
Arriving  home,  he  wrote  as  follows  : 

Low  Hampton,  December  7th,  1842. 

"Dear  Brother  Himes I  did  not  get  home 

till  10  o'clock  on  Saturday  night.  On  Wednesday,  at 
6  o'clock,  P.  M.,  same  day  we  left  New  York,  we  were 
brought  up  all  standing  in  a  snow-bank,  which  we  kept 
bunting,  with  two  or  three  locomotives,  until  the  next  even- 
ing at  6  o'clock.  On  Thursday,  by  the  mighty  power  of 
three  locomotives,  we  gained  twelve  miles  from  Great  Bar- 
rington,  where  we  were  brought  up  the-  night  before,  to  the 
state  line,  where  they  left  us  and  we  waited  for  the  Boston 
cars,  which  had  been  due  thirty  hours.  That  night  we  slept 
in  the  cars,  as  the  night  before,  and  Friday  we  got  as  far  as 
Lansingburg.  Saturday  I  came  home,  cold  and  weary, 
worn  out  and  exhausted.  On  my  arrival,  I  found  a  messen- 
ger after  me  and  my  wife,  to  visit  her  mother,  who  was  sup- 
posed to  be  dying ;  my  wife  went,  and  soon  returned  with 
the  news  of  her  death.     After  attending  the  funeral,  we 


170  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

came  home  on  Monday  night,  and  yesterday  I  got  some  rest. 
This  morning  I  feel  some  refreshed.  But  the  fatigue  of 
body  and  mind  has  almost  unnerved  this  old  frame,  and  un- 
fitted me  to  endure  the  burdens  which  Providence  calls  upon 
me  to  bear.  I  find  that,  as  I  grow  old,  I  grow  more  peevish, 
and  cannot  bear  so  much  contradiction.  Therefore  I  am 
called  uncharitable  and  severe.  No  matter ;  this  frail  life 
will  soon  be  over.  My  Master  will  soon  call  me  home,  and 
soon  the  scoffer  and  I  shall  be  in  another  world,  to  render  our 
account  before  a  righteous  tribunal.  I  will  therefore  appeal 
to  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  Universe  for  the  redress  of 
grievances,  and  the  rendering  of  judgment  in  my  favor,  by 
a    revocation   of  the  judgment  in  the  court   below.     The 

World  and  Clergy  vs.  Miller 

"  I  remain,  looking  for  the  blessed  hope, 

"William  Miller." 


CHAPTER    XIII. 

SYNOPSIS    OF     HIS     VIEWS ADDRESS    TO    BELIEVERS    IN    THE    NEAR 

ADVENT INTERVIEW      AT      WATERFORD  —  UTICA  HOAX     AT 

WASHINGTON DISTURBANCE     AT      PHILADELPHIA THE     THIRD 

OF    APRIL STATEMENT    OF    HIS    AFFAIRS,    ETC. 

Mr.  Miller  had  not  been  sufficiently  definite  respecting 
the  time  of  the  Advent,  in  the  estimation  of  some  who  em- 
braced his  views.  The  expression  "  about  the  year  1848" 
they  regarded  as  too  general.  As  he  was  about  to  enter  on 
the  long  looked-for  year,  he  prepared  and  published  the  fol- 
lowing 

SYNOPSIS    OF   HIS   VIEWS. 

"I.  I  believe  Jesus  Christ  will  come  again  to  this  earth. 
—  Proof.  John  14:  3;  Acts  1:  11;  1  Thess.  4  :  16  ; 
Rev.  1:  7. 

"II.  I  believe  he  will  come  in  all  the  glory  of  his 
Father.  —  Matt.  16  :  27 ;  Mark  8  :  38. 

"  III.  I  believe  he  will  come  in  the  clouds  of  heaven.  — 
Matt.  24  :  30;  Mark  13:  26;  Dan.  7:  13. 


SYNOPSIS   OF   HIS    VIEWS.  171 

"IV.  I  believe  he  will  then  receive  his  kingdom,  which 
will  be  eternal.  —  Dan.  7  :  14  ;  Luke  19  :  12, 15 ;  2  Tim.  4  : 1. 

"V.  I  believe  the  saints  will  then  possess  the  kingdom 
forever.  —Dan.  7  :  18,  22,  27  :  Matt.  24  :  34  ;  Luke  12 : 
22,  29;  1  Cor.  9:  25;  2  Tim.  4:  8;  Jas.  1:  12;  1 
Pet.  5  :  4. 

"VI.  I  believe  at  Christ's  second  coming  the  body  of 
every  departed  saint  will  be  raised,  like  Christ's  glorious 
body.  — 1  Cor.  15:  20—29;  1  Cor.  3:  2. 

1  *  VII.  I  believe  that  the  righteous  who  are  living  on 
the  earth  when  he  comes  will  be  changed  from  mortal  to 
immortal  bodies,  and,  with  them  who  are  raised  from  the 
dead,  will  be  caught  up  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,  and  so 
be  forever  with  the  Lord.  —  1  Cor.  15  :  51 — 53 ;  Phil. 
3:  20,  21;  1  Thess.  4 :  14—17. 

"VIII.  I  believe  the  saints  will  then  be  presented  to 
God  blameless,  without  spot  or  wrinkle,  in  love.  —  1  Cor. 
4  :  14 ;  Eph.  5:27;  Col.  1 :  22 ;  Jude  24 :  1  Thess. 
3 :  13 ;  1  Cor.  1 :  7,  8. 

"IX.  I  believe,  when  Christ  comes  the  second  time,  he 
will  come  to  finish  the  controversy  of  Zion,  to  deliver  his 
children  from  all  bondage,  to  conquer  their  last  enemy,  and 
to  deliver  them  from  the  power  of  the  temnter,  which  is  the 
devil.— Deut.  24  :  1 ;  Isa.  34  :  8  ;  40^2,  5;  41:  10— 
12 :  Rom.  8  :  21—23 ;  Heb.  2 :  13—15 ;  1  Cor.  15 :  54, 
56  ;  Rev.  20  :  1—6. 

"X.  I  believe  that  when  Christ  comes  he  will  destroy 
the  bodies  of  the  living  wicked  by  fire,  as  those  of  the  old 
world  were  destroyed  by  water,  and  shut  up  their  souls  in 
the  pit  of  woe,  until  their  resurrection  unto  damnation.  — 
Psa.  50  :  3  ;  97  :  3  ;  Isa.  66  :  15,  16  ;  Dan.  7  :  10  ;  Mai. 
4:  1;  Matt.  3:  12;  1  Cor.  3:  13;  1  Thess.  5:  2,  3;  2 
Thess.  1 :  7—9  ;  1  Pet.  1:7:2  Pet.  3  :  7,  10  ;  Isa.  24  : 
21,  22;  Jude  6— 15;  Rev.  20:  3—15;  John  5 :  29;  Acts 
24  :  15. 

"  XL  I  believe,  when  the  earth  is  cleansed  by  fire,  that 
Christ  and  his  saints  will  then  take  possession  of  the  earth, 
and  dwell  therein  forever.  Then  the  kingdom  will  be  given 
to  the  saints.— Psa.  37:  9—11,  22—34;  Prov.  2:  21, 
22 ;  10 :  30 :  Isa.  60 :  21  ;  Matt.  5:5;  Rev.  5 :  10. 

"  XII.  I  believe  the  time  is  appointed  of  God  when  these 
things  shall  be  accomplished.  —  Acts  17  :  31 ;  Job  7:1; 


172  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM   MILLER. 

14:  14;  Psa.  81 :  3;  Isa.  40  :  2;  Dan.  8 :  19;  10:  1; 
11 :  35 ;  Hab.   2:3;  Acts  17 :  26. 

"XIII.  I  believe  God  has  revealed  the  time.  —  Isa. 
44:  7,  8;  45:  20,  21;  Dan.  12:  10;  Amos  3:  7;  1 
Thess.  5  :  4. 

"XIV.  I  believe  many  who  are  professors  and  preach- 
ers will  never  believe  or  know  the  time  until  it  comes  upon 
them.  —  Jer.  8:7;  Matt.  24  :  50  ;  Jer.  25  :    34—37. 

"XV.  I  believe  the  wise,  they  who  are  to  shine  as  the 
brightness  of  the  firmament,  Dan.  12 :  3,  will  understand  the 
time.  —  Eccl.  8:5;  Dan.  12:  10;  Matt.  24:  43—45; 
25  :  6—10  ;  1  Thess.  5  :  4  ;  1  Pet.  1 :  9—13. 

"XVI.  I  believe  the  time  can  be  known  by  all  who 
desire  to  understand  and  to  be  ready  for  his  coming. 
And  I  am  fully  convinced  that  some  time  between  March 
21st,  1843,  and  March  21st,  1844,  according  to  the  Jewish 
mode  of  computation  of  time,  Christ  will  come,  and  bring  all 
his  saints  with  him  ;  and  that  then  he  will  reward  every  man 
as  his  works  shall  be.  —Matt.  16  :  27;  Rev.  22  :  12.r 


?? 


With  the  commencement  of  the  new  year,  he  issued  the 
following 

ADDRESS  TO  BELIEVERS  IN  THE  N£AR  ADVENT. 

"  Dear  Brethren  :  —  This  year,  according  to  our  faith, 
is  the  last  year  that  Satan  will  reign  in  our  earth.  Jesus 
Christ  will  come,  and  bruise  his  head.  The  kingdom  of  the 
earth  will  be  dashed  to  pieces,  which  is  the  same  thing. 
And  he,  whose  right  it  is  to  reign,  will  take  the  kingdom, 
and  possess  it  for  ever  and  ever. 

"  And  the  God  of  peace  shall  tread  Satan  under  your 
feet  shortly.  Therefore,  we  have  but  a  little  time  more  to  do 
as  our  good  brother,  Paul,  was  commanded,  Acts  26  :  18, — 
'to  open  their  eyes,  and  to  turn  them  from  darkness  to 
light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God,  that  they  may 
receive  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  inheritance  among  them 
which  are  sanctified  by  faith  that  is  in  me.5  Let  us  then  put 
forth  our  best  energies  in  this  cause ;  let  every  one  of  us  try, 
by  persuasion,  by  the  help  and  grace  of  God,  to  get  one,  at 
least,  of  our  friends  to  come  to  Christ,  in  this  last  year  of 
redemption ;  and,  if  we  succeed,  what  an  army  of  regener- 
ated souls  may  we  not  hail  in  the  new  heavens  and  new 


ADDRESS   TO    BELIEVERS.  173 

earth  !  I  pray  God,  my  brethren,  that  nothing  may  deter 
you  from  this  work.  Let  scoffers  scoff,  and  liars  tell  lies ; 
we  must  not  suffer  ourselves  to  be  drawn  from  our  work. 
Yes,  the  glorious  work  of  salvation,  within  a  few  short 
months,  will  be  finished  forever.  Then  I  need  not  exhort 
you  more  on  this  point ;  you  yourselves  know  the  value  of 
this  great  salvation. 

"  And  another  thing  it  is  well  for  us  to  remember.  The 
world  will  watch  for  our  halting.  They  cannot  think  we 
believe  what  we  speak,  for  they  count  our  faith  a  strange  faith ; 
and  now  beware,  and  not  give  them  any  vantage-ground 
over  us.  They  will,  perhaps,  look  for  the  halting  and  fall- 
ing away  of  many.  But  I  hope  none  who  are  looking  for 
the  glorious  appearing  will  let  their  faith  waver.  Keep 
cool ;  let  patience  have  its  perfect  work  ;  that,  after  ye 
have  done  the  will  of  God,  ye  may  receive  the  promise. 
This  year  will  try  our  faith  ;  wTe  must  be  tried,  purified  and 
made  white :  and  if  there  should  be  any  among  us  who  do 
not  in  heart  believe,  they  will  go  out  from  us  :  but  I  am 
persuaded  that  there  cannot  be  many  such  ;  for  it  is  a  doc- 
trine so  repugnant  to  the  carnal  heart,  so  opposite  to  the 
worldly-minded,  so  far  from  the  cold  professor,  the  bigot  and 
hypocrite,  that  none  of  them  will,  or  can,  believe  in  a  doc- 
trine so  searching  as  the  immediate  appearing  of  Jesus 
Christ  to  judge  the  world.  I  am,  therefore,  persuaded  bet- 
ter things  of  you,  brethren,  although  I  thus  speak.  I  be- 
seech you,  my  dear  brethren,  be  careful  that  Satan  get  no 
advantage  over  you  by  scattering  coals  of  wild-fire  among 
you  ;  for,  if  he  cannot  drive  you  into  unbelief  and  doubt,  he 
will  try  his  wild-fire  of  fanaticism  and  speculation  to  get 
us  from  the  word  of  God.  Be  watchful  and  sober,  and 
hope  to  the  end,  for  the  grace  that  shall  be  brought  unto  you 
at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ. 

"  Think  not,  my  brethren,  that  I  stand  in  doubt  of  your 
perseverance.  I  know  your  faith,  your  love,  and  hope,  to  be 
rooted  and  grounded  on  the  word  of  the  Almighty  ;  you  are 
not  dependent  on  the  wisdom  or  commandments  of  men; 
many,  if  not  all  of  you,  have  examined  for  yourselves  ;  you 
have  studied,  and  found  true,  what  at  first  was  only  reported 
unto  you ;  you  have  found  the  Bible  much  more  precious 
than  you  had  before  conceived :  its  doctrines  to  be  congenial 


174  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

■with  the  holy  and  just  character  of  God  :  its  precepts  to  be 
wise,  benevolent,  and  kind ;  and  its  prophecies  to  be  clear 
and  lucid,  carrying  conviction  of  the  truth  and  inspiration 
of  the  Scriptures,  by  a  harmony  of  manner  and  matter  from 
Genesis  to  Revelation.  In  one  word,  you  have  found  a  new 
Bible,  and  I  hope  and  believe  you  have  read  it  with  new 
delight.  I  fear  not  that  you  can  ever  be  satisfied  with  the 
views  of  our  opponents :  their  manner  of  explaining  Scrip- 
ture is  too  carnal  to  satisfy  the  devoted  child  of  God. 

-'Then  let  me  advise  to  a  continual  searching  for  truth, 
both  for  faith  and  practice  ;  and,  wherever  we  have  wan- 
dered from  the  word  of  God,  let  us  come  back  to  the  primi- 
tive simplicity  of  the  gospel  once  delivered  to  the  saints. 
Thus  we  shall  be  found  ready  at  his  coming  to  give  an  ac- 
count of  our  stewardship,  and  hear  our  blessed  Master  say, 
1  Well  done,  thou  good  and  faithful  servant :  enter  thou  into 
the  joy  of  thy  Lord.'  Every  truth  we  get  from  the  blessed 
book  prepares  us  better  for  his  coming  and  kingdom.  Every 
error  prevents  us,  in  part,  from  being  ready.  Let  us,  then, 
stand  strong  in  the  faith,  with  our  loins  girt  about  with 
truth,  and  our  lamps  trimmed  and  burning,  and  waiting  for 
our  Lord,  ready  to  enter  the  promised  land,  the  true  inher- 
itance of  the  saints.  This  year  the  fulness  of  time  will 
come,  the  shout  of  victory  will  be  heard  in  heaven,  the 
triumphant  return  of  our  great  Captain  may  be  expected, 
the  new  song  will  commence  before  the  throne,  eternity 
begin  its  revolution,  and  time  shall  be  no  more. 

1 1  This  year  —  0  blessed  year !  —  the  captive  will  be  released, 
the  prison  doors  will  be  opened,  death  will  have  no  more 
dominion  over  us,  and  life,  eternal  life,  be  our  everlasting 
reward.  This  year  —  0  glorious  year !  — the  trump  of  jubilee 
will  be  blown,  the  exiled  children  will  return,  the  pilgrims 
reach  their  home,  from  earth  and  heaven  the  scattered  rem- 
nant come  and  meet  in  middle  air, —  the  fathers  before  the 
flood,  Noah  and  his  sons,  Abraham  and  his,  the  Jew  and 
Gentile,  all  who  have  died  in  faith,  of  every  nation,  kindred, 
tongue,  and  people,  will  meet  to  part  no  more.  This  year  ! 
the  long  looked-for  year  of  years  !  the  best !  it  is  come  !  I 
shall  hope  to  meet  you  all,  through  faith  in  God  and  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb.  Until  then,  farewell.  May  God  bless 
you,  and  sustain  you  in  the  faith. 


DIALOGUE   WITH   A   MINISTER.  175 

u  May  you  be  patient  in  all  tribulation,  and  endure  unto 
the  end.  May  you  this  jrear  be  crowned  with  immortality 
and  glory.  And  finally,  my  brethren,  '  I  pray  God,  your 
whole  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  be  preserved  blameless  unto  the 
coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.' 

"William  Miller. 

"Low  Hampton,  January  1,  1843. n 

In  compliance  with  the  wishes  of  Elder  Marvin  Eastwood 
and  his  congregation,  in  Waterford.  N.  Y.,  Mr.  Miller  lec- 
tured there  from  the  last  day  of  December,  1842,  to  the  8th 
of  January,  1843.  On  the  morning  of  the  third  day,  the 
Congregational  minister  called  on  him,  with  a  deacon  of  his 
church,  and  wished  to  ask  him  a  few  questions. 

Five  other  gentlemen  soon  came  in,  and  took  seats  in  the 
room. 

Mr.  Miller  told  the  clergyman  that  he  might  ask  any 
question  he  pleased,  and  he  would  answer  the  best  he  could. 

The  minister  accordingly  asked  him  some  twenty  questions, 
each  one  of  which  Mr.  M.  answered  by  quoting  a  text  of 
Scripture.  He  then  thanked  Mr.  M.  for  his  politeness,  and 
acknowledged  that  he  had  answered  him  fairly.  "But," 
said  he,  "I  do  not  believe  your  doctrine." 

"  What  doctrine?  "  said  Mr.  M. 

"  I  don't  believe  God  has  revealed  the  time." 

Mr.  M.  asked  him  if  he  would  answer  three  questions.^ 

The  minister  replied  that  he  did  not  come  there  to  answer 
questions. 

One  of  the  gentlemen  present  then  inquired  of  the  minis- 
ter why  he  would  not  answer. 

He  said  he  did  not  come  .for  the  purpose  of  answering 
questions,  and  did  not  choose  to. 

The  gentleman  then  said  to  him :  "I  have  disbelieved  the 
Bible,  but  have  been  one  of  your  principal  supporters  many 
years ;  and,  wThen  Mr.  Miller  has  answered  so  many  of  your 

*  Mr.  If.  was  in  the  habit  of  replying  to  those  who  denied  that  God 
has  revealed  the  time  by  asking  them  :  "  What  '  wonders  '  are  referred 
to  in  Daniel  12  :  6?  "  "Who  gave  the  answer  to  the  inquiry  there 
asked  ?  "  and  "  If  those  *  wonders  '  include  the  resurrection,  — and  the 
Lord  has  sworn  with  an  oath  that  it  shall  be  for  a  time,  times,  and  a 
half,  —  is  not  the  time  revealed  ?  "  adding,  "  Whether  we  understand  it 
correctly  or  not,  is  another  question."  —  See  p.  265. 

16 


176  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

questions,  if  you  will  not  let  him  ask  you  three,  I  can  pay 
you  no  more  of  my  money."  He  added,  "  I  have  seen 
more  evidence  in  proof  of  the  truth  of  the  Bible  in  the  few 
lectures  I  have  heard  from  Mr.  M.  than  in  all  the  sermons 
you  have  ever  preached." 

"Why,"  said  the  minister,  "how  does  Mr.  Miller  prove 
the  truth  of  the  Bible?" 

"  By  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy." 

"  And  do  not  I  prove  it  in  the  same  way  ?  Do  not  I  show 
how  all  the  prophecies  in  reference  to  Christ  were  fulfilled  in 
him?"   ' 

"  Why,  yes,  you  do  that ;  but  you  have  never  shown  that 
those  prophecies  were  written  before  Christ ;  and  it  is  very 
easy  to  write  a  history.  But  Mr.  M.  has  shown  us  how  the 
prophecies  are  being  fulfilled  in  our  own  day ;  he  has  shown 
us  how  the  history  of  Napoleon  is  a  perfect  fulfilment  of 
prophecy ;  and  I  know  that  that  prophecy  was  written  be- 
fore the  time  of  Napoleon." 

The  minister  and  deacon  retired.  The  gentleman  then 
turned  to  Mr.  Miller,  and  said  that  he  and  his  four  compan- 
ions were  infidels  ;  that  they  had  attended  his  lectures ;  had 
become  quite  interested  ;  but  had  very  curious  feelings,  and 
wished  to  know  what  ailed  them. 

Mr.  M.  inquired  whether  they  would  attend  any  more  of 
his  lectures. 

They  replied  that  they  should  lose  none  of  them. 

"  Well,"  said  Mr.  M.,  "I  think  I  will  not  tell  you  what 
ails  you ;  but,  if  you  will  give  close  attention  during  the 
week,  I  think  you  will  find  out." 

They  attended  his  lectures,  and,  before  the  end  of  the 
week,  with  a  number  of  others  who  had  been  infidels,  were 
rejoicing  in  the  goodness  and  forgiveness  of  God,  At  the 
close  of  his  last  lecture,  one  hundred  and  twenty  persons 
voluntarily  arose  for  prayers ;  a  goodly  number  were  soon 
rejoicing  in  the  Saviour,  and  a  glorious  result  followed. 

On  the  10th  of  January,  1843,  Mr.  M.  began  a  course 
of  lectures  in  the  Presbyterian  church  in  Utica,  N.  Y., 
where  an  interest  was  elicited  which  extended  to  surrounding 
places.  Invitations  were  received  from  many  of  the  neigh- 
boring towns,  which  could  not  be  complied  with.  The 
meetings  closed  on  the   17th,  when  forty  or  fifty  were 


HOAX   IN   WASHINGTON.  177 

inquiring  what  they  should  do  to  be  saved.  A  good  work 
had  been  commenced,  which  continued  for  several  weeks. 
The  "Methodist  Reformer,"  published  in  that  city,  announced 
that  "  many  thoughtless  sinners  and  cold  professors  were 
stirred  up  to  duty  by  them  ;  "  and  the  "  Baptist  Register  " 
said,  "Mr.  Miller's  appeals  were  often  very  pungent,  and 
made  a  deep  impression  on  the  audience,  and  many  came 
forward  for  prayer." 

HOAX   IN   WASHINGTON. 

The  great  rush  there  was  at  this  time,  to  hear  Mr.  Miller 
lecture  on  the  prophecies,  is  well  illustrated  by  the  following, 
from  the  Washington  correspondence  of  the  Boston  "  Mer- 
cantile Journal"  : 

«  Washington,  January  22d,  1843. 

"Mr.  Sleeper:  —  I  wrote  you  yesterday,  among  other 
news,  that  Mr.  Miller,  the  end-of-the-world  man,  was  here. 
It  was  announced  yesterday,  by  hand-bills,  stuck  up  all  over 
the  city,  that  he  would  preach  to-day  [Sunday]  at  3  o'clock, 
p.  M.3  from  the  steps  of  the  Patent  Office;  and,  immediately 
after  dinner,  crowds  were  observed  wending  their  way  in 
that  direction.  The  commissioner  of  the  public  buildings,  or 
some  other  officer,  had  had  erected  a  barricade  about  half- 
way up  the  steps,  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  off  the  crowd ; 
and  when  I  went  to  the  place  of  meeting,  the  space  between 
Seventh  and  Ninth  streets,  in  front  of  the  Patent  Office,  was 
nearly  filled  with  people,  their  numbers  variously  estimated 
from  five  to  ten  thousand,  of  all  sexes,  ages,  and  colors.  I 
should  think  there  were  over  five  thousand. 

"  The  space  above  the  barricades  was  guarded  by  police 
officers,  who  had  permitted  some  few  persons,  principally 
members  of  Congress,  to  pass  over,  which  filled  some  of  the 
unfavored  ones  with  no  little  indignation,  and  the  democratic 
spirit  of  the  people  began  to  work. 

"A  number  of  abortive  attempts  were  made  to  pass  the 
barrier,  but,  except  to  the  privileged  few,  unsuccessfully. 
One  person,  however,  more  determined  than  the  rest,  showed 
fight,  and  was  rather  roughly  handled  by  the  officers,  when 
the  crowd,  taking  his  part,  and  presuming  he  was  abused, 
made  a  rush  to  the  barrier,  to  break  it  down,  but  for  the 


178  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

moment  unsuccessfully.  The  crowd  became,  however,  more 
calm,  until  a  gentleman,  whom  I  understood  to  be  a  clergy- 
man, stepped  forward,  and  said  that  he  had  been  requested 
to  inform  the  people  before  him  '  that  there  was  no  certain 
information  that  Mr.  Miller  teas  in  the  city ;'  upon 
which  a  shout  arose,  unlike  anything  I  have  heard  since  the 
shouts  on  Bunker  Hill,  in  September,  1840.  intermingled 
with  cries  of  *  Hoax  ! :  '  Humbug  !  '  &c.  The  crowd,  how- 
ever, became  still  enough  in  a  few  minutes  for  the  clergyman 
to  continue  his  remarks,  which  were  as  follows  :  l  As  J  said 
before.  Mr.  Miller  is.  probably,  not  in  the  citv :  but,  as  it  is 
a  pity  that  such  a  concourse  should  be  entirely  disappointed 
of  receiving  benefit  on  such  a  day.  I  think  it  would  be  well 

O  J  ' 

for  you  to  call  on  a  distinguished  gentleman.  Mr.  Briggs.  a 
member  of  Congress  from  Massachusetts,  to  give  you  a 
temperance  address.  He  is  now  on  the  platform.'  Cries 
of  '  Brisks  !  '   -  Bribers  !  '  ensued :  but  Mr.  Brkss  had  no 

CO  CO  t  I  CO 

notion  of  being  called  out  in  this  unceremonious  manner, 
and,  though  urgently  solicited  by  his  friends,  declined.  The 
crowd,  perceiving  that  there  was  to  be  no  l  fun  J  made  for 
them,  determined  to  make  some  for  themselves ;  and  again 
rushing  against  the  barricade,  this  time  successfully,  suc- 
ceeded in  obtaining  a  footing  on  the  platform,  and  drove  the 
privileged  ones,  ladies  and  all,  through  the  Patent  Office. — 
the  door  of  which  was  kicked  open,  —  into  the  basement, 
and  from  thence  into  the  street ;  and  then,  as  far  as  I  know, 
quietly  dispersed. 

"  The  hoax  was  undoubtedly  got  up  by  some  printer's 
devil,  or  other  mischievous  boys,  who  had  the  handbills 
printed  and  distributed.  A  great  many  people  from  the 
neighboring  parts  of  the  district  were  arriving  during  the 
day,  and  a  number  of  vehicles  and  horsemen  were  on  the 
ground.  In  fine,  it  was  not  a  bad  hoax  —  pretty  well  got 
up  :  but  if  it  had  been  on  any  other  day  than  Sunday,  it 
would  have  been  better/'' 

From  the  21st  to  the  29th  of  January,  1843,  Mr.  Miller 
lectured  in  Bennington,  Vt.  He  then  went  to  Philadelphia, 
Pa.,  and  lectured  in  the  large  hall  of  the  Chinese  Museum, 
which  was  crowded  to  excess,  from  the  3d  to  the  10th  of 
February.     On  the  evening  of  the  Tth,  a  gentleman  arose 


TESTIMONY   FROM   AN   INFIDEL.  179 

and  confessed  that  he  had  been  an  infidel,  but  could  now 
praise  God  for  what  he  had  done  for  his  soul.  Many  others 
followed,  bearing  testimony  to  God's  pardoning  mercy. 

The  interest  attending  the  lectures  continued  to  increase 
from  the  first  till  the  evening  before  their  close.  On  that 
evening  the  house  was  filled  to  overflowing  at  an  early  hour. 

When  the  lecture  commenced,  the  crowd  and  confusion 
were  so  great  as  to  render  it  almost  impossible  to  hear  the 
speaker ;  and  it  was  thought  best,  after  notifying  the  people 
what  was  to  be  done,  and  giving  an  opportunity  for  all  who 
wished  so  to  do  to  go  out,  to  close  the  doors,  and  thus  secure 
silence.  This  was  done,  and  the  speaker  proceeded  to  his 
subject.  For  about  half  an  hour  there  was  profound  silence, 
and  deep  interest  was  evinced  by  the  immense  audience,  with 
the  exception  of  a  few  unruly  boys.  This  would  have  un- 
doubtedly continued,  had  it  not  been  for  the  circumstance  of 
a  lady's  fainting,  and  it  becoming  necessary  to  open  the 
doors  for  her  to  go  out.  When  the  door  was  opened,  there 
was  a  rush  of  persons  who  stood  outside  for  admittance.  As 
soon  as  this  was  done,  and  a  few  had  come  into  the  room,  an 
unruly  boy  raised  the  cry  of  "Fire,"  which  threw  the  whole 
assembly  into  confusion,  some  crying  one  thing,  and  some 
another.  There  did  not  appear  to  be  any  disposition  on  the 
part  of  the  multitude  to  disturb  the  meeting ;  but  all  came 
from  the  rush  and  cry.  The  disorder  arose  more  from  the 
excited  fears  of  the  people  than  from  any  other  cause.  Order 
was  again  restored,  and  the  speaker  proceeded  for  a  few 
moments,  when  another  rush  was  made,  and  the  excitement 
became  so  great  within  as  to  render  it  expedient  to  dismiss 
the  meeting. 

The  police  of  the  city  were  willing  to  do  what  they  could, 
but  there  was  nothing  for  them  to  do ;  for  they  could  not 
govern  the  excited  nerves  of  the  audience. 

On  Friday  morning  the  multitude  were  again  assembled 
at  an  early  hour  for  service,  and  Mr.  Miller  proceeded  to 
answer  numerous  questions  which  had  been  proposed.  A 
most  profound  attention  was  manifested  until  the  meeting 
was  about  half  through,  when  a  man  arose  and  wished  to 
propose  some  questions,  which  interrupted  the  order  of  the 
meeting. 

The  owners  became  alarmed  for  the  safety  of  the  hall,  and 
16* 


180  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

ordered  the  meetings  to  be  closed  after  the  afternoon  service. 
Although  this  fact  was  unknown  except  by  a  few  persons, 
yet  the  room  was  literally  packed  with  a  mass  of  living 
beings,  who  listened  with  breathless  silence  to  Mr.  Miller's 
last  lecture. 

There  had  been  no  intimation  given  throughout  of  what 
had  transpired  to  close  the  meetings,  until  he  came  to  bid 
them  farewell.  There  were  then  bitter  tears  and  strong 
sighs.  The  announcement  of  the  fact  came  unexpectedly. 
The  appeal  was  melting  beyond  expression.  Probably  more 
than  a  thousand  persons  arose  to  testify  their  faith  in  the  truth 
of  the  Advent  near,  and  three  or  four  hundred  of  the  uncon- 
verted arose  to  request  an  interest  in  his  prayers.  Mr. 
Miller  closed  the  services  by  a  most  feeling  and  appropriate 
prayer  and  the  benediction.  No  blame  was  attached  to  the 
owners  of  the  Museum  for  their  course. 

About  this  time  it  was  announced,  by  a  correspondent 
of  Bennett's  N.  Y.  Herald,  that  Mr.  Miller  had  fixed  on  the 
3d  of  April  for  the  Advent.  This  being  industriously  circu- 
lated, led  Prof.  Moses  Stuart  to  say  of '"  the  men  of  April 
3d,  1843,"  "I  would  respectfully  suggest,  that  in  some 
way  or  other  they  have,  in  all  probability,  made  a  small 
piistake  as  to  the  exact  day  of  the  month  when  the  grand 
catastrophe  takes  place,  —  the  1st  of  April  being  evidently 
much  more  appropriate  to  their  arrangements  than  any  other 
day  in  the  year.''  — Hints,  2d  ed.,  p.  173.  The  New  York 
Observer  of  February  11, 1843,  in  commenting  on  this  sug- 
gestion of  Prof.  Stuart,  thought  it  sufficient  (;  to  quiet  every 
feeling  of  alarm ! r"  As  remarks  like  these,  and  other 
equally  foolish  stories  which  are  referred  to  in  the  following 
letter,  met  the  eye  of  Mr.  Miller,  he  thus  denied  them 
through  the  columns  of  the  Kl  Signs  of  the  Times  "  : 

tl  Dear  Brother  Himes  :  —  At  the  request  of  numer- 
ous friends,  I  herein  transmit  to  them,  through  you,  a  brief 
statement  of  facts,  relative  to  the  many  stories  with  which 
the  public  are  humbugged,  concerning  the  principles  I  advo- 
cate, and  the  management  of  my  worldly  concerns. 

w  My  principles,  in  brief,  are,  that  Jesus  Christ  will  come 
again  to  this  earth,  cleanse,  purify,  and  take  possession  of 
the  same,  with  all  his  saints,  some  time  between  March  21, 


REBUKE    OF   HIS    OPPONENTS.  181 

1843,  and  March  21,  1844.  I  have  never,  for  the  space 
of  more  than  twenty-three  years,  had  any  other  time 
preached  or  jmblished  by  me  ;  I  have  never  fixed  on  any 
month,  day,  or  hour,  during  that  period  ;  I  have  never  found 
any  mistake  in  reckoning,  summing  up,  or  miscalculation  ; 
I  have  made  no  provision  for  any  other  time ;  I  am  per- 
fectly satisfied  that  the  Bible  is  true,  and  is  the  Word  of 
God,  and  I  am  confident  that  I  rely  wholly  on  the  blessed 
Book  for  my  faith  in  this  matter.  I  am  not  a  prophet.  I 
am  not  sent  to  prophesy,  but  to  read,  believe,  and  publish 
what  God  has  inspired  the  ancient  prophets  to  administer 
to  us,  in  the  prophecies  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament. 
These  have  been,  and  now  are  my  principles,  and  I  hope  I 
shall  never  be  ashamed  of  them. 

11  As  to  worldly  cares,  I  have  had  but  very  fewT  for  twelve 
years  past.  I  have  a  wife  and  eight  children  ;  I  have  great 
reason  to  believe  they  all  are  the  children  of  God,  and 
believers  in  the  same  doctrine  with  myself.  I  own  a  small 
farm  in  Low  Hampton,  N.  Y. ;  my  family  support  them- 
selves upon  it,  and  I  believe  they  are  esteemed  frugal,  tem- 
perate and  industrious.  They  use  hospitality  without 
grudging,  and  never  turn  a  pilgrim  from  the  house,  nor  the 
needy  from  the  door.  I  bless  God  my  family  are  benevo- 
lent and  kind  to  all  men  who  need  their  sympathy  or  aid ; 
I  have  no  cares  to  manage,  except  my  own  individual  wants ; 
I  have  no  funds  or  debts  due  me  of  any  amount ;  '  I  owe 
no  man  any  thing;  "  and  I  have  expended  more  than  two 
thousand  dollars  of  my  property  in  twelve  years,  besides  wThat 
God  has  given  me  through  the  dear  friends,  in  this  cause. 
••  Yours  respectfully,  William  Miller. 

"Philadelphia,  Feb.  4th:  1844." 

The  almost  unparalleled  abuse  to  which  Mr.  Miller  was 
subject,  through  most  of  the  secular  and  some  of  the 
religious  papers,  during  this  period,  called  forth  the  following 
manly  rebuke  from  the  "  Sandy  Hill  Herald,"  a  paper  pub- 
lished in  Mr.  Miller's  own  county  : 

11  FATHER    MILLER. 

"  While  we  are  not  prepared  to  subscribe  to  the  doctrine 
promulgated  by  this  gentleman,  we  have  been  surprised  at 


182  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

the  means  made  use  of  by  its  opponents  to  put  it  down. 
Certainly  all  who  have  ever  heard  him  lecture,  or  have  read 
his  works,  must  acknowledge  that  he  is  a  sound  reasoner,  and, 
as  such,  is  entitled  to  fair  arguments  from  those  who  differ 
with  him.  Yet  his  opponents  do  not  see  fit  to  exert  their 
reasoning  powers,  but  content  themselves  by  denouncing  the 
old  gentleman  as  a  'fanatic,'  a  'liar,'  i deluded  old  fool,' 
1  speculator,'  &c,  &c.  Mr.  Miller  is  now,  and  has  been  for 
many  years,  a  resident  of  this  county,  and  as  a  citizen,  a 
man,  and  a  Christian,  stands  high  in  the  estimation  of  all  who 
know  him;  and  we  have  been  pained  to  hear  the  gray- 
headed,  trembling  old  man  denounced  as  a  c  speculating 
knave.' 

u  Speculating,  forsooth!  Why  need  he  speculate?  He 
has  enough  of  the  good  things  of  this  world  to  last  him 
through  the  few  days  which  at  longest  may  be  his  on  earth, 
without  travelling  from  city  to  city,  from  town  to  village, 
laboring  night  and  day  like  a  galley-slave,  to  add  to  a  store 
which  is  already  abundant.  Who,  that  has  witnessed  his 
earnestness  in  the  pulpit,  and  listened  to  the  uncultivated 
eloquence  of  nature,  which  falls  in  such  rich  profusion  from 
his  lips,  dare  say  that  he  is  an  impostor  1  We  answer,  with- 
out fear  of  contradiction  from  any  candid  mind,  None  !  We 
are  not  prepared  to  say  how  far  the  old  man  may  be  from 
correct,  but  one  thing,  we  doubt  not  that  he  is  sincere  ; 
and  wTe  do  hope  that  some  one  of  his  many  opponents  will 
take  the  pains  to  investigate  the  subject,  and,  if  it  be  in  their 
power,  drive  the  old  man  from  his  position.  It  is  certainly  a 
subject  worthy  of  investigation,  and  one  fraught  with  moment- 
ous consequences  ;  and  no  matter  who  the  individual  is  that 
promulgates  the  doctrine,  if  he  offers  good  reasons  and  sound 
arguments,  drawn  from  the  word  of  God  and  from  history, 
we  say  he  is  entitled  to  his  position  until,  by  the  same  means, 
he  is  driven  from  it.  Mr.  Miller  certainly  goes  to  the  foun- 
tain of  knowledge,  revelation  and  history,  for  proof,  and 
should  not  be  answered  with  low,  vulgar  and  blasphemous 
witticisms. 

"  We  like  the  following  remarks,  copied  from  an  exchange, 
in  relation  to  this  subject : 

"  'Millerism.  —  This  is  the  term  by  which  the  opinions 
of  those  who  oppose  the  idea  of  a  millennium,  and  maintain 


REBUKE  OF  HIS  OPPONENTS.  183 

that  the  end  of  the  world  will  take  place  in  1843,  are  distin- 
guished ;  and  they  are  thus  denominated  because  Mr.  Miller 
first  propagated  it. 

u  '  We  certainly  are  not  a  convert  to  the  theory;  but  we 
feel  bound  in  duty  to  lift  our  voice  in  reproof  of,  and  enter 
our  protest  against,  the  infidel  scurrility  and  blasphemous 
witticisms  with  which  some  of  our  exchanges  abound,  and 
from  which  religious  periodicals  are  not  wholly  exempt. 

"  '  If  Mr.  Miller  is  in  error,  it  is  possible  to  prove  him  so, 
but  not  by  vulgar  and  blasphemous  witticisms  and  ribaldry ; 
these  are  not  arguments.  And  to  treat  a  subject  of  such 
overwhelming  majesty,  and  fearful  consequences  —  a  sub- 
ject which  has  been  made  the  theme  of  prophecy  in  both 
Testaments  ;  the  truth  of  which,  occur  when  it  will,  God 
has  sealed  by  his  own  unequivocal  averments  —  we  repeat 
it,  to  make  puns  and  display  vulgar  wit  upon  this  subject, 
is  not  merely  to  sport  with  the  feelings  of  its  propagators 
and  advocates,  but  is  to  make  a  jest  of  the  day  of  judgment, 
to  scoff  at  the  Deity  himself,  and  contemn  the  terrors  of  his 
judgment  bar.'  " 

The  "  Pittsburg  (Pa.)  Gazette"  also  said: 

1 '  We  do  not  concur  with  Mr.  Miller  in  his  interpretations 
of  the  prophecies ;  but  we  can  see  neither  reason  nor  Christian- 
ity in  the  unmerited  reproach  which  is  heaped  upon  him  for 
propagating  an  honest  opinion.  And  that  he  is  honest  we 
have  no  doubt.  True,  we  think  him  in  error,  but  believe  he 
is  honestly  so.  And  suppose  he  does  err  in  his  views  of 
prophecy,  does  that  make  him  either  a  knave  or  a  fool  1 
Have  not  some  of  the  greatest  or  best  men  who  have  lived 
since  the  days  of  the  apostles  erred  in  the  same  way  2  And 
who  will  say  that  all  these,  including  Whitby,  Bishop  New- 
ton, and  others  of  equal  celebrity,  were  monomaniacs,  and 
driven  by  a  pitiable  or  culpable  frenzy  to  the  adoption  of 
their  opinions  ?  The  truth  is,  as  we  apprehend,  that  many  of 
those  who  are  so  indecorous  and  vituperative  in  their  denun- 
ciations of  Miller,  are  in  fearful  trepidation,  lest  the  day 
being  so  near  at  hand,  '  should  overtake  them  unawares,' 
and  hence,  like  cowardly  boys  in  the  dark,  they  make  a 
great  noise  by  way  of  keeping  up  their  courage,  and  to 
frighten  away  the  bugbears." 


184  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

The  editor  of  the  "  Countryman,"  in  giving  the  Synopsis 
of  Mr.  Miller's  views,  added  : 

"  The  abstract  of  Miller's  views,  which  we  give  on  our 
fourth  page,  so  far  as  wTe  give  it  in  this  paper,  is  and  has 
been,  according  to  what  we  have  been  able  to  ascertain,  the 
professed  belief  of  orthodox  Christians,  from  the  day  of 
Christ's  ascension  into  heaven  until  the  present  hour. 
Therefore  they  are  not  merely  Mr.  Miller's  views,  but  the 
acknowledged  views  of  the  Christian  church,  the  received 
Bible  doctrine;  and  if  Bible  doctrine,  then  are  they  the 
truth. 

"  One  of  the  apostles,  who  shared  as  largely  in  the  con- 
fidence and  personal  instruction  of  his  Master  as  any,  con- 
cludes a  reference  to  this  subject  in  these  words :  '  Where- 
fore, beloved,  seeing  that  ye  look  for  such  things,  be  diligent, 
that  ye  may  be  found  of  him  in  peace,  without  spot  and 
blameless.7  2  Peter  3 :  14.  If  the  things  here  referred  to 
have  not  taken  place,  — and  who  will  say  they  have  ? — they, 
of  course,  are  yet  to  transpire.  If  so,  is  not  the  caution  of 
the  apostle  as  important  in  this  our  day,  as  it  was  when  he 
uttered  it  ?  And  if  it  was  an  event  to  be  looked  for  and 
hoped  for  then,  should  it  be  an  object  of  less  solicitude 
now  7  Every  intelligent,  free  moral  agent  upon  earth, 
whether  aware  of  it  or  not,  has  an  interest  in  this  issue. 
He  may  absorb  his  mind  in  other  matters,  he  may  drown 
reflection  in  the  whirl  of  business  or  pleasure,  he  may  wrap 
his  soul  in  projects  of  wealth  or  ambition,  and  fill  his  aspir- 
ing eye  with  the  anticipated  glories  of  some  dazzling  height, 
but  his  interest  still  cleaves  to  the  immortality  of  his  nature, 
and.  sooner  or  later,  he  must  discover  that  it  is  the  most  im- 
portant interest  ever  presented  to  his  consideration,  or  that 
is  attached  to  his  being  or  his  destiny.  Is  it  not,  then,  the 
height  of  wisdom  to  give  heed  to  these  things,  and  examine 
them  with  all  that  diligence  and  dispassionate  attention  their 
importance  merits?  " 


CHAPTER   XIV. 

MR.     MILLER     AND     HIS      REVIEWERS DOCTORS     DOWLING,     CHASE, 

JARVIS,    ETC.  THE     FOURTH     KINGDOM THE    LITTLE    HORN 

PROPHETIC     NUMBERS SEVENTY    WEEKS COMING    OP     CHRIST, 

ETC. 

As  it  will  be  proper  to  take  some  notice  of  the  controversy 
between  Mr.  Miller  and  those  who  entered  the  lists  against 
him,  it  may  as  well  be  referred  to  in  this  connection.  As 
his  views  gained  adherents,  various  publications  of  sermons, 
reviews,  &c,  were  issued  from  the  press — the  design  of 
which  was  to  counteract  his  expositions  of  prophecy.  Some 
of  these  were  direct  attacks  on  him,  and  others  only  indi- 
rect, by  opposing  the  long  established  principles  of  Prot- 
estant interpretation.  The  controversy  had  respect  princi- 
pally to  the  following  points  : 

1.  The  Fourth  Kingdom  of  Daniel   7th  chapter. 

2.  The  Little  Horn  of  the  same. 

3.  The  Little  Horn  of  the  8th. 

4.  The  Length  of  the  Prophetic  Periods. 

5.  The  Commencement  of  the  Seventy  Weeks  of  Dan.  9tL 

6.  Their  Connection  with  the  2300  days  of  Dan.  8th. 

7.  The  Rise  of  the  Little  Horn  of  the  7th. 

8.  The  Nature  of  Christ's  Second  Advent. 

9.  The  Return  of  the  Jews. 

10.  The  Epoch  of  the  Resurrection. 

Mr.  Miller  laid  no  claim  to  originality  in  his  position  re- 
specting any  of  the  above  points ;  but  maintained  that  they 
wTere  established  opinions  of  the  church,  and,  being  so,  that 
his  conclusions  from  such  premises  were  well  sustained  by 
human  as  well  as  by  divine  teachings.  While  his  oppo- 
nents attacked  the  view  he  took  of  these  points,  no  one  of 
them  assailed  the  whole;  but  each  admitted  his  correctness 
on  some  of  the  points;  and,  among  them,  the  whole  were 
admitted. 

1.  The  Fourth  Kingdom  of  Daniel.  This  he  claimed 
to  be  the  Roman.  In  this,  he  had  the  support  of  the  ablest 
and  most  judicious  expositors  of  every  *ge>     William  Cun- 


186  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLEK. 

ninghame,  Esq.,  of  England,  an  eminent  expositor,  in  speak- 
ing of  the  four  parts  of  the  great  image  of  the  dream  of 
Nebuchadnezzar,  says,  that  they  are  "  respectively  applied  by 
Daniel  himself  to  four  kingdoms,  which  have,  by  the 
unanimous  voice  of  the  Jewish  and  Christian  churches, 
for  more  than  eighteen  centuries,  been  identified  with  the 
empires  of  Babylon,  Persia,  Greece,  and  Rome."  Should 
this  be  questioned,  the  witnesses  are  abundant.  In  the 
Jewish  Church,  we  have  the  Targum  of  Jonathan  Ben 
Uzziel,  Josephus,  and  the  whole  modern  synagogue,  includ- 
ing the  names  of  Abarbanal,  Kimchi,  David  Levi,  and  others. 
In  the  Christian  Church,  such  as  Barnabas,  Irenseus,  Chry- 
sostom,  Cyril  of  Jerusalem  in  his  catechism,  Jerome,  and 
according  to  him,  all  ecclesiastical  writers,  Hyppolitus  and 
Lactantius  in  the  early  ages ;  since  the  Reformation,  Luther, 
Calvin,  Mede,  T.  H.  Horne,^  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  Bishop 
Newton,  Dr.  Hales,  Scott,  Clarke,  Brown,  f  Watson, J 
Bishop  Lloyd,  Daubuz,  Brightman,  Faber,  Noel,  Dr.  Hop- 
kins, and  almost  every  biblical  expositor  of  any  note  in  the 
Protestant  church.  Those  who  make  this  application  of 
the  four  parts  of  the  image  have  no  difficulty  in  making  a 
like  application  of  the  four  beasts  of  Daniel  seventh.  The 
remarkable  similarity  of  the  two  visions  requires  this. 

This  long  established  opinion  was  controverted  by  Prof. 
Stuart  of  Andover,  in  his  "  Hints,"  before  referred  to.  He 
said:  "  The  fourth  beast  in  Dan.  7  :  6,  &c,  is,  beyond  all 
reasonable  doubt,  the  divided  Grecian  dominion,  which  suc- 
ceeded the  reign  of  Alexander  the  Great." — Hints,  p.  86. 

Prof.  Irah  Chase,  D.  D.,  said:  l '  The  fourth  empire  was 
that  of  the  successors  of  Alexander,  among  whom  Seleucus 
was  preeminent." — Remarks  on  the  Book  of  Daniel,  p.  20. 

Others,  of  lesser  note,  copied  from  these,  and  took  a  sim- 
ilar position  respecting  the  fourth  kingdom. 

Of  those  who  opposed  Mr.  Miller  on  other  points,  John 
Dowling,  D.  D.,  of  New  York  city,  in  his  "  Exposition  of  the 
Prophecies,"  did  not  assail  this. 

Rev.  W.  T.  Hamilton,  D.  D.,  of  Mobile,  Ala.,  in  his  "Lec- 
ture on    Millerism,"   said:    "I  freely  admit,  that   in   his 

*  See  Introduction,  vol.  1,  p.  333;  vol.  4,  pp.  189,  191 
t  See  Harmony  of  Scripture. 
X  Tliool.  Die,  p.  228 


MR.    MILLER   AND    HIS   REVIEWERS.  187 

general  outline  of  interpretation  (excluding  his  dates),  fol- 
lowing, as  he  does,  much  abler  men  who  have  gone  before 
him,  Mr.  Miller  is  correct.  The  several  djmasties  prefigured 
in  the  great  metallic  image  of  Nebuchadnezzar  —  in  the  vision 
of  the  four  beasts,  and  of  the  ram  and  he-goat  —  Daniel 
himself  points  out.     Mistake  there  is  not  easy/"' — p.  18. 

Dr.  Jarvis,  D.  D.,  LL.  D.,  of  Middletown,  QfcL,  in  his 
"Two  Discourses  on  Prophecy,"  also  applies  the  fourth 
beast  in  the  same  manner. —  p.  42. 

J.  T.  Hinton,  A.  M.,  of  St.  Louis  (••  Prophecies  Illus- 
trated *'),  said  :  "  The  dream  of  the  image,  the  vision  of  the 
four  beasts,  that  of  the  ram  and  he-goat,  and  the  ;  scriptures 
of  truth/  give  us  four  detailed  descriptions  of  the  history  of 
the  world,  from  the  time  of  Daniel  to  the  '  time  of  the  end ; ? 
and  the  Apocalyptic  visions  refer  to  the  same  period  as  the 
latter  portion  of  the  prophecies  of  Daniel.*' — p.  25.  "  The 
dream  of  the  image  is  of  the  greatest  importance ;  it  leaves 
without  excuse  those  who  would  reduce  the  remaining  proph- 
ecies of  Daniel  to  the  narrow  compass  of  the  little  acts  of 
the  reign  of  Antiochus  Ephiphanes.  Nothing  can  be  clearer 
than  that  the  gold,  the  silver,  the  brass,  the  iron,  and  the 
clay,  are  designed  to  cover  the  history  of  the  world  in  all  its 
successive  ages.'' — p.  27. 

Again  he  says  :  "  We  think  our  readers  will  concur  with 
us,  and  with  the  great  mass  of  writers  on  prophecy,  that  the 
'  ten  horns,'  or  Daniel's  '  fourth  beast,'  and  :  the  beast  rising 
out  of  the  sea,  having  seven  heads,'  of  the  Apocalyptic 
visions,  refer  to  the  ten  kingdoms  into  which  the  Roman 
empire  was  divided.  Of  the  identity  of  the  ten-horned 
beasts  of  Daniel  and  John  there  can  be  no  reasonable 
doubt."— p.  232. 

2.  The  Little  Horn  of  the  seventh  chapter  of  Daniel. 
This  he  held  to  be  the  Papacy.  This  was  no  novel  view  of 
that  symbol,  being,  as  it  was,  the  view  of  the  whole  Prot- 
estant world.  See  Dr.  Clarke's  Notes  on  2  Thess.  ii., 
Croly  on  the  Apoc.,  pp.  113 — 117.  Home's  Int.,  vol.  4, 
p.  191,  Watson's  Theol.  Die,  p.  62,  G.  T.  Noel,  Pros- 
pects of  the  Church  of  Christ,  p.  100,  William  Cunning- 
hame,  Esq.,  Political  Dest.  of  the  Earth,  p.  28,  Mede, 
Newton,  Scott,  Daubuz,  Hurd.  Jurieu.  Vitringa,  Fleming. 
17 


188  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

Lowman,   and  numerous  others  of  the  best  standard  ex- 
positors. 

Prof.  Stuart,  Prof.  Chase,  and  others  who  applied  the 
"fourth  beast"  to  the  four  divisions  of  Alexander's  suc- 
cessors, applied  the  little  horn  of  the  same  chapter  to  An- 
tiochus  Epiphanes. 

Mr.  Hinton  took  the  same  view  that  Mr.  Miller  did  of 
this  symbol.  He  said  :  "If  any  other  events  of  history  can 
be  set  forth  and  made  to  fill  out  all  the  particulars  men- 
tioned by  Daniel  and  John,  we  should  be  happy  to  see  them 
stated;  till  then,  we  shall  believe  the  little  horn  rising  up 
amidst  the  ten  horns,  and  having  three  of  them  plucked  up 
before  it,  to  refer  to  the  rise  of  the  Papacy  in  the  midst  of 
the  kingdoms  into  which  the  Roman  empire  was  divided  in 
the  sixth  century." — p.  237. 

Dr.  Dowling,  Dr.  Hamilton,  and  others,  who  admitted 
that  the  fourth  beast  symbolized  the  Roman  empire,  also 
applied  its  little  horn  to  the  Papacy. 

8.  The  Little  Horn  of  the  eighth  chapter  of  Daniel, 
that  became  exceeding  great.  This  Mr.  Miller  believed 
to  be  a  symbol  of  Rome.  In  this  view  he  was  sustained  by 
Sir  Isaac  Newton,  Bishop  Newton,  Dr.  Hales,  Martin 
Luther,  Dr.  Prideaux,  Dr.  Clarke,  Dr.  Hopkins,  Wm.  Cun- 
ninghame,  and  others. 

Dr.  Home  said  of  the  first  three  above  named  :  ' i  Sir 
Isaac  Newton,  Bishop  Newton,  and  Dr.  Hales,  have  clearly 
shown  that  the  Roman  power,  and  no  other,  is  intended ; 
for,  although  some  of  the  particulars  may  agree  very  well 
with  that  king  (Antiochus),  yet  others  can  by  no  means  be 
reconciled  to  him ;  while  all  of  them  agree  and  correspond 
exactly  with  the  Romans,  and  with  no  other  power.''1 — 
Intro.,  vol.  4,  p.  191. 

In  addition  to  these,  almost  all  the  old  writers  who 
applied  it  to  Antiochus  Epiphanes  did  so  only  as  the  type  of 
Rome,  where  they  looked  for  the  Antichrist.  St.  Cyril, 
Bishop  of  Jerusalem,  in  the  fourth  century,  said,  "This, 
the  predicted  Antichrist,  will  come  when  the  times  of  the 
(Pagan)  Roman  empire  shall  be  fulfilled,  and  the  consum- 
mation of  the  world  approach.  Ten  kings  of  the  Romans 
shall  rise  together,  in  different  places  indeed,  but  they  shall 
reign  at   the   same   time.     Among  these,   the  eleventh  is 


MR.    MILLER   AND    HIS   REVIEWERS.  189 

Antichrist,  who,  by  magical  and  wicked  artifices,  shall  seize 
the  Roman  power." 

Prof.  Stuart,  Prof.  Chase,  and  even  Dr.  Dowling,  with 
others,  applied  this  symbol  to  Antiochus  Ephiphanes. 

Rev.  R.  C.  Shimeal,  of  New  York  ("  Prophecy  in  Course 
of  Fulfilment  ").  dissented  from  Mr.  Miller,  and  also  from 
the  foregoing,  and  understood  this  horn  to  symbolize  the 
Mahommedan  power.     Mr.  Hinton  took  the  same  view. 

Mr.  Miller  was  sustained  in  his  application  of  this  point 
by  Dr.  Hamilton  and  Dr.  Jarvis.  The  latter  said:  "Sir 
Isaac  Newton,  with  that  sagacity  which  was  peculiar  to 
him,  was  the  first,  I  believe,  who  showed  clearly  that  this 
little  horn  was  the  Roman  power." — p.  43. 

4.  The  Length  of  the  Prophetic  Numbers.  In  explain- 
ing these,  Mr.  Miller  adopted  the  Protestant  view,  that  they 
represent  years.  There  is  probably  no  point  respecting 
which  Protestant  commentators  have  been  more  agreed  than 
this.  Faber,  Prideaux,  Mede,  Clarke,  Scott,  the  two  New- 
tons,  Wesley,  and  almost  every  expositor  of  note,  have 
considered  this  a  settled  question.  Indeed,  so  universal 
has  been  this  interpretation  of  these  periods,  that  Professor 
Stuart  says  :  "  It  is  a  singular  fact  that  the  great 
mass  of  interpreters  in  the  English  and  American  world 
have,  for  many  years,  been  wont  to  understand  the  days 
designated  in  Daniel  and  the  Apocalypse  as  the  representa- 
tives or  symbols  of  years.  I  have  found  it  difficult  to 
trace  the  origin  of  this  general,  /  might  say,  almost 
universal  custom." — Hints,  p.  77. 

He  also  says:  "For  a  long  time  these  principles  have 
been  so  current  among  the  expositors  of  the  English  and 
American  world,  that  scarcely  a  serious  attempt  to  vindicate 
them  has  of  late  been  made.  They  have  been  regarded  as 
so  plain  and  so  well  fortified  against  all  objections,  that 
most  expositors  have  deemed  it  -quite  useless  even  to  at- 
tempt to  defend  them.  One  might,  indeed,  almost  compare 
the  ready  and  unwavering  assumption  of  these  propositions, 
to  the  assumption  of  the  first  self-evident  axioms  in  the 
science  of  geometry,  which  not  only  may  dispense  with  any 
process  of  ratiocination  m  their  defence,  but  which  do  not 
even  admit  of  any." — Hints,  p.  8. 

Prof  Stuart;  however,  dissented  from  this  "almost  urn- 


190  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

versal  custom/  and  claimed  that  the  prophetic  days-— the 
1260,  1290,  1335,  and  2300— indicated  only  days.  Of 
the  1260  he  said:  "  The  very  manner  of  the  expression 
indicates,  of  course,  that  it  was  not  the  design  of  the  speaker 
or  writer  to  be  exact  to  a  day  or  an  hour.  A  little  more  or 
a  little  less  than  three  and  a  half  years  would,  as  every  rea- 
sonable interpreter  must  acknowledge,  accord  perfectly  well 
with  the  general  designation  here,  where  plainly  the  aim  is 
not  statistical  exactness,  but  a  mere  generalizing  of  the  period 
in  question." — Hints,  p.  73. 

Again  he  says  :  "  A  statistical  exactness  cannot  be  aimed 
at  in  cases  of  this  nature.  Any  near  approximation  to 
the  measure  of  time  in  question  would,  of  course,  be  regarded 
as  a  sufficient  reason  for  setting  it  down  under  the  general 
rubric." 

"  By  the  1260  days,"  he  said,  "  no  more  than  three  and 
a  half  years  literally  can  possibly  be  meant"  (p.  75)  ;  and 
of  the  2300:  "We  must  consider  these  2300  evening- 
mornings  as  an  expression  of  simple  time,  i.  e.,  of  so  many 
days,  reckoned  in  the  Hebrew  manner." — p.  100. 

Prof.  O.  E.  Stowe,  D.  D.,  of  Andover,  Mass.,  in  his 
"  Millennial  Arithmetic,"  claimed  that  "  day  does  not  mean 
year  in  the  prophecies  any  more  than  elsewhere  ;"  and  that 
u  a  definite  designation  of  time  was  not  here  intended,  but 
only  a  general  expression." — p.  13. 

Prof.  Chase  agreed  with  Prof.  Stuart  respecting  the  1260 
days  ;  but  said  of  the  2300  :  "  The  period  predicted  is  not 
two  thousand  and  three  hundred  days,  but  only  half  that 
number  — 1150." — Remarks,  p.  60. 

Dr.  Dowling  agreed  with  Prof.  Chase,  that  the  2300 
were  half  days  ;  but  differed  both  from  him  and  Prof.  Stuart 
respecting  the  1260,  of  which  he  says  :  H  I  believe,  as  Mr. 
Miller  does,  and  indeed  most  Protestant  commentators,  that 
the  1260  years  denote  the  duration  of  the  dominion  of  the 
Papal  Antichrist.  After  comparing  these  passages,  and  the 
entire  prophecies  to  which  they  belong,  with  the  history  and 
character  of  Papacy,  I  cannot  doubt  that  this  is  the  mystical 
Babylon,  whose  name  is  written  in  Rev.  17  :  5  ;  and  that, 
when  the  1260  years  are  accomplished,  then  shall  that  great 
city,  Babylon,  be  thrown  down,  and  shall  be  found  no  more 
at  all."—  Reply  to  Miller,  p.  27. 


MR.  MILLER   AND    HIS   REVIEWERS.  191 

Prof.  Pond,  D.  D.  (of  Bangor,  Me.),  in  his  "  Review 
of  Second  Advent  Publications, "  was  in  doubt  whether  the 
periods  of  Daniel  could  be  proved  to  be  years  ;  but  was 
willing  to  cut  the  matter  short  by  conceding  the  point  that 
it  may  be  so." — p.  22. 

Dr.  Jams,  Mr.  Hinton,  Mr.  Shimeal,  and  Prof.  Bush, 
sustained  Mr.  Miller  respecting  the  significance  of  the 
prophetic  days. 

In  speaking  of  the  application  of  the  2300  days  to  the 
time  of  the  persecution  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  Dr.  Jarvis 
says  :  "  This  interpretation  would,  of  course,  be  fatal  to  all 
Mr.  Miller's  calculations.  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore, 
that  it  should  be  eagerly  embraced  by  many  of  his  oppo- 
nents. But,  with  all  due  deference,  I  think  there  are 
insuperable  difficulties  in  the  way  of  this  scheme,  which 
makes  Antiochus  Epiphanes  the  little  horn."  "  I  make  no 
difficulty,  therefore,  in  admitting  the  evening-morning  to 
mean  a  prophetic  day." — Sermons,  p.  46.  He  further 
says  that  Daniel  was  told  to  shut  up  the  vision,  "  because 
the  fulfilment  of  it  should  be  so  far  distant ;  a  strong  collat- 
eral argument,  as  I  understand  it,  for  the  interpretation  of 
2300  prophetic  days." — lb.,  p.  47.  And  "  The  vision  is 
the  whole  vision  of  the  ram  and  he-goat." — p.  45. 

Prof.  Bush,  in  writing  to  Mr.  Miller,  said  :  "  I  do  not 
conceive  your  errors  on  the  subject  of  chronology  to  be  at 
all  of  a  serious  nature,  or  in  fact  to  be  very  wide  of  the 
truth.  In  taking  a  day  as  the  prophetical  time  for  a  year, 
I  believe  you  are  sustained  by  the  soundest  exegesis,  as 
well  as  fortified  by  the  high  names  of  Mede,  Sir  Isaac 
Kewton,  Bishop  Newton,  Faber,  Scott,  Keith,  and  a  host 
of  others,  who  have  long  since  come  to  substantially  your 
conclusions  on  this  head.  They  all  agree  that  the  leading 
periods  mentioned  by  Daniel  and  John  do  actually  expire 
about  this  age  of  the  world;  and  it  would  be  strange  logic 
that  would  convict  you  of  heresy  for  holding  in  effect  the 
same  views  which  stand  forth  so  prominently  in  the  notices 
of  these  eminent  divines."  "Your  results  in  this  field  of 
inquiry  do  not  strike  me  as  so  far  out  of  the  way  as  to 
affect  any  of  the  great  interests  of  truth  or  duty."  —  Ad, 
Her.,  vol.  7,  p.  38. 

Writing  to  Prof.  Stuart,  Prof.  Bush  said :  u  I  am  not 
IT* 


192  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER, 

inclined  precipitately  to  discard  an  opinion  long  prevalent 
in  the  churchy  which  has  commended  itself  to  those  whose 
judgments  are  entitled  to  profound  respect.  That  such  is 
the  case  in  regard  to  the  year-day  calculations  of  prophecy 
I  am  abundantly  satisfied  ;  and  I  confess,  too,  at  once  to 
the  pleasure  that  it  affords  me  to  find  that  that  which  is  sus- 
tained by  age  is  also  sustained  by  argument."  Again  he 
says  :  "  Mede  is  very  far  from  being  the  first  who  adopted 
this  solution  of  the  symbolic  term,  day.  It  is  the  solution 
naturally  arising  from  the  construction  put,  in  all  ages,  upon 
the  oracle  of  Daniel  respecting  the  SEVENTY  WEEKS. 
which,  by  Jews  and  Christians,  have  been  interpreted  weeks 
of  years,  on  the  principle  of  a  day  standing  for  a  year. 
This  fact  is  obvious  from  the  Rabbinical  writers  en  masse, 
where  they  touch  upon  the  subject ;  and  Eusebius  tells  us 
(Dem.  Evangl.  8,  p.  258  —  Ed.  Steph.),  that  this  interpre- 
tation in  his  day  was  generally,  if  not  universally  admitted" 
M  I  have,  in  my  own  collection,  writers  on  the  prophecies, 
previous  to  the  time  of  Mede,  who  interpret  the  1260  days 
as  so  many  years,  and  who  are  so  far  from  broaching  this  as 
a  new  interpretation,  that  they  do  not  even  pause  to  give 
the  grounds  of  it,  but  proceed  onwards,  as  if  no  risk  were 
run  in  taking  for  granted  the  soundness  of  the  principle 
which  came  doivn  to  them  accredited  by  the  immemorial 
usage  of  their  predecessors"  —  Hierophant,  vol.  1,  p. 
245. 

If  the  old  established  principle  of  the  year-day  theory  is 
wrong,  then,  said  Prof.  Bush,  "  not  only  has  the  whole 
Christian  world  been  led  astray  for  ages  by  a  mere  ignis 
fatnus  of  false  hermeneutics,  but  the  church  is  at  once  cut 
loose  from  every  chronological  mooring,  and  set  adrift  in  the 
open  sea,  without  the  vestige  of  a  beacon,  light-house,  or 
star,  by  which  to  determine  her  bearings  or  distances  from 
the  desired  millennial  haven  to  which  she  had  hoped  she  was 
tending." 

5.  The  Commencement  of  the  Seventy  Weeks. —  These 
were  believed  by  Mr.  Miller  to  be  wTeeks  of  years,  —  four 
hundred  and  ninety  years, — and  commenced  with  the  decree 
of  Artaxerxes  Longimanus  to  restore  and  build  Jerusalem, 
according  to  Ezra  seventh,  b.  c.  457.  This  has  also  long 
been  considered  by  commentators  to  be  a  settled  point ;  and 


MR.  MILLER   AND   HIS   REVIEWERS.  193 

it  probably  would  not  have  been  disputed  were  it  not  for  a 
desire  to  avoid  the  conclusion  to  which  Mr.  Miller  came,  on 
the  supposition  that  it  was  the  beginning  of  the  2300  days. 
On  so  settled  a  point  as  this  it  is  only  necessary  to  mention 
such  names  as  Home  (see  Int.,  vol.  1,  p.  336,  vol.  4,  p. 
191),  Prideaux  (see  Connection,  pp.  227—256),  Clarke 
(see  Notes  on  9th  of  Daniel),  Watson  (Theol.  Die,  p.  96), 
William  Howel,  LL.  D.  (Int.  of  Gen.  His.,  vol.  1,  p.  209), 
Scott,  and  Cunninghame. 

This  point  was  not  much  questioned  by  any.  A  Mr.  Kin- 
drick,  in  a  "  New  Exposition  of  the  Prophecies  of  Daniel," 
said  :  "  They  are  seventy  years  only,  and  commenced  with 
the  birth  of  Christ  and  ended  with  the  destruction  of  the 
Jewish  nation."  —  p.  4.  Rev.  Calvin  Newton  affirmed,  in 
the  Christian  Watchman,  that  they  were  fulfilled  in  seventy 
literal  weeks.  And  Prof.  Stuart  said  :  "  It  would  require 
a  volume  of  considerable  magnitude  even  to  give  a  history 
of  the  ever-varying  and  contradictory  opinions  of  critics 
respecting  this  locus  vexatissimns ;  and  perhaps  a  still 
larger,  to  establish  an  exegesis  which  would  stand.  I  am 
fully  of  opinion  that  no  interpretation  as  yet  published  will 
stand  the  test  of  thorough  grammatico-historical  criticism." 
—  Hints,  p.  104. 

Mr.  Shimeal,  while  he  admitted  that  they  are  weeks  of 
years,  commenced  them  four  years  later  than  Mr.  M. 

Dr.  Hamilton  sustained  Mr.  Miller  on  this  point.  He 
said :  ' '  The  interpretation  which  Mr.  Miller  gives  of  Daniel's 
seventy  weeks,  commencing  with  the  decree  of  Artaxerxes 
Longimanus,  in  the  seventh  year  of  his  reign  (b.  c.  457), 
for  the  rebuilding  of  Jerusalem,  and  terminating  with  the 
death  of  Christ,  A.  D.  33,  is,  in  the  main,  correct,  because 
here  Mr.  M.  but  gives  a  tolerably  faithful  report  of  the 
result  of  the  labors  of  the  learned  Prideaux  and  others  in 
this  field  of  research." — p.  18.  This  interpretation  wTas  not 
denied  by  Dr.  Jarvis,  Mr.  Hinton,  and  Mr.  Morris.  And 
Dr.  Dowling  said  :  "  Mr.  Miller  says  the  four  hundred  and 
ninety  years  begin  b.  c.  45TJ  which  is  correct.  He  says 
they  end  A.  d.  33,  which  is  also  correct." — p.  49. 

6.  The  Connection  between  the  70  Weeks  and  2300 
Days.  —  This  was  a  vital  point  in  the  chronology  of  Mr.  M. 
to  bring  the  end  in  1843.     The  Rev.  William  Hales,  D.  D., 


194  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   IvilLLER. 

the  most  learned  modern  chronologer,  says  :  "  This  simple 
and  ingenious  adjustment  of  the  chronology  of  the  seventy 
■weeks,  considered  as  forming  a  branch  of  the  2300  days, 
was  originally  due  to  the  sagacity  of  Hans  "Wood.  Esq..  of 
Rossniead,  in  the  county  of  Westmeath,  Ireland,  and  pub- 
lished by  him  in  an  anonymous  commentary  on  the  Revela- 
tion of  St.  John.  Lon..  1787." — New  Anal  Chro..  vol.  2. 
p.  564.  He  elsewhere  calls  it  ;,the  most  ingenious  of  its 
class." 

The  argument  which  Mr.  Miller  used  in  support  of  this 
point  was  based  upon  the  literal  meaning  of  the  Hebrew 
word,  which,  in  our  version  of  Daniel  9  :  24.  is  rendered 
" determined"' — cut  off .  or  cut  out. —  and  the  circumstances 
in  which  Gabriel  appeared  to  Daniel,  as  stated  in  the  ninth 
chapter,  with  the  instruction  given. 

In  the  8th  chapter  of  Daniel  is  recorded  a  vision  which 
was  to  extend  to  the  cleansing  of  the  sanctuary,  and  to  con- 
tinue 2300  days.  Daniel  had  "  sought  for  the  meaning" 
of  that  vision,  and  a  voice  said  :  "  Gabriel,  make  this  man 
to  understand  the  vision."  Gabriel  said  to  Daniel :  "I  will 
make  thee  know  what  shall  be  in  the  last  end  of  the  indig- 
nation ;  for.  at  the  time  appointed,  the  end  shall  be;"  and 
then  proceeded  to  explain  the  symbols,  but  said  nothing  of 
their  duration.  At  the  close  of  the  explanation  Daniel 
fainted,  and  was  sick  certain  davs :  and  he  says  he  "was 
astonished  at  the  vision,  but  none  understood  it."' 

Three  years  subsequent  to  that  vision.  Daniel  —  under- 
standing '-'by  books  the  number  of  the  years  whereof  the 
word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Jeremiah  the  prophet,  that  he 
would  accomplish  seventy  years  in  the  desolations  of  Jerusa- 
lem."—  set  his  face  unto  the  Lord  to  seek  by  prayer  and 
supplications,  with  fasting,  and  sackcloth,  and  ashes.  He 
proceeded  to  confess  his  own  sins  and  the  sins  of  his  people, 
and  to  supplicate  the  Lord's  favor  on  the  sanctuary  that  was 
desolate.  While  he  was  thus  speaking,  Daniel  says  :  — 
"  Gabriel,  whom  I  had  seen  in  the  vision  at  the  beginning. 
being  caused  to  fly  swiftly,  touched  me  about  the  time  of  the 
evening  oblation ;  and  he  informed  me,  and  talked  with  me, 
and  said  :  •  0  Daniel,  I  am  now  come  forth  to  give  thee 
skill  and  understanding.  At  the  beginning  of  thy  supplica- 
tions the  commandment  came  forth,  and  I  am  come  to  show 


MR.   MILLER   AND    HIS   REVIEWERS.  195 

thee ;  for  thou  art  greatly  beloved ;  therefore  understand 
the  matter  and  consider  the  vision.  Seventy  weeks  are 
determined^  "  fee,  "  from  the  going  forth  of  the  decree  to 
restore  and  to  build  Jerusalem  unto  Messiah  the  Prince  :" — 
after  which  Jerusalem  was  to  be  made  desolate  c;  until  the 
consummation.'' — Dan.  9:  20 — 27. 

Dr.  Gill,  a  distinguished  divine  and  scholar,  rendered  the 
word  "determined"  cut  offz  and  is  sustained  by  good 
scholars. 

Hengstenberg,  who  enters  into  a  critical  examination  of 
the  original  text,  says :  "  But  the  very  use  of  the  word, 
which  does  not  elsewhere  occur,  while  others,  much  more 
frequently  used,  were  at  hand,  if  Daniel  had  wished  to  ex- 
press the  idea  of  determination,  and  of  which  he  has  else- 
where, and  even  in  this  portion,  availed  himself,  seems  to 
argue  that  the  word  stands  from  regard  to  its  original 
meaning,  and  represents  the  seventy  weeks,  in  contrast  with 
a  determination  of  time  {en  platei),  as  a  period  cut  off 
f ram  subsequent  duration,  and  accurately  limited."  — 
Christology  of  the  Old  Test,  vol.  2,  p.  301.  Washington, 
1839. 

Gesenius,  in  his  Hebrew  Lexicon,  gives  cut  off  as  the 
definition  of  the  word,  and  many  others  of  the  first  standing 
as  to  learning  and  research,  and  several  versions  have  thus 
rendered  the  word.^ 

*  A  Hebrew  scholar,  of  high  reputation,  makes  the  following  remarks 
upon  the  word  :  "  The  verb  chathak  (in  the  Niphal  form,  passive,  nech- 
tak)  is  found  only  in  Daniel  9  :  24.  Not  another  instance  of  its  use  can 
be  traced  in  the  entire  Hebrew  Testament.  As  Chaldaic  and  Rabbinical 
usage  must  give  us  the  true  sense  of  the  word;  if  we  are  guided  by  these, 
it  has  the  single  signification  of  cutting,  or  cutting  off.  In  the  Chaldeo- 
Rabbinic  dictionary  of  Stockius,  the  word  *  chathak '  is  thus  defined  :  — 

"  *  Scidit,  abscidit,  conscidit,  inscidit,  excidit ' —  To  cut,  to  cut  away, 
to  cut  in  pieces,  to  cut  or  engrave,  to  cut  off. 

"  Mercerus,  in  his  'Thesaurus,'  furnishes  a  specimen  of  Rabbinical 
usage  in  the  phrase  chathikah  shelbasar —  '  a  piece  of  flesh,'  or  '  a  cut 
of  flesh.'  He  translates  the  word  as  it  occurs  in  Daniel  9  :  24,  by  *  prce- 
cisa  est ' —  was  cut  off. 

"  In  the  literal  version  of  Arias  Montanus  it  is  translated  s  decisa  est ' — 
was  cut  off;  in  the  marginal  reading,  which  is  grammatically  correct, 
it  is  rendered  by  the  plural  '  decisae  sunt ' — were  cut  off. 

"  In  the  Latin  version  of  Junius  and  Tremellius,  nechtak  is  rendered 
(  decisae  sunt '  —  were  cut  off. 

"  Again  :  in  Theodotion's  Greek  version  of  Daniel  (which  is  the  version 
used  in  the  Vatican  copy  of  the  Septuagint  as  being  the  most  faithful),  it 


196  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

Such  being  the  meaning  of  the  word,  and  such  the  cir- 
cumstances under  which  the  prophecy  of  the  seventy  weeks 
was  given,  Mr.  Miller  claimed  that  the  vision  which  Daniel 
was  called  on  to  consider,  and  respecting  which  Gabriel  was 
to  give  him  skill  and  understanding,  was  the  vision  of  the 
8th  chapter;  of  which  Daniel  sought  the  meaning,  which 
Gabriel  was  commanded  to  make  him  understand,  but  which, 
after  Gabriel's  explanation,  none  understood  ;  and  that  the 
seventy  weeks  of  years  —  i.  e.,  four  hundred  and  ninety 
that  were  cut  off —  were  cut  off  from  the  2300  days  of  that 
vision ;  and,  consequently,  that  those  two  periods  must  be 
dated  from  the  same  epoch,  and  the  longer  extend  1810 
years  after  the  termination  of  the  shorter. 

The  same  view  was  advocated  by  several  English  divines. 
Rev.  M.  Habershon  says  :  "  In  this  conclusion  I  am  happy 
in  agreeing  with  Mr.  Cunninghame,  who  says,  '  I  am  not 
aware  of  any  more  probable  era  which  can  be  selected  for 
the  commencement  of  the  2300  years  than  that  which  has 
been  chosen  by  some  recent  writers,  who  supposed  this 
period  to  have  begun  at  the  same  time  with  the  seventy 
weeks  of  Daniel,  or  in  the  year  b.  c.  457,  and  consequently 
that  it  will  terminate  in  the  year  1843.'  5? — Hist.  Dis.3  p. 
30T. 

The  celebrated  Joseph  Wolf,  though  dating  the  seventy 
weeks  and  2300  days  from  b.  c.  453,  commenced  them  at 
the  same  epoch.  —  Missionary  Labors,  p.  259.  And  Dr. 
Wilson,  of  Cincinnati,  who  is  high  authority  in  the  Presby- 
terian church,  in  a  discourse  on  "Cleansing  the  Sanctuary," 
says  :  "  I  undertake  to  show  that  Daniel's  '  seventy  weeks  ' 
is  the  beginning  or  first  part  of  the  '  two  thousand  three 
hundred  days  ;  allotted  for  the  cleansing  of  the  sanctuary ; 
that  Daniel's  l  time,  times,  and  a  half ?  is  the  last  or  con- 
cluding part  of  the  2300  days." 

Prof.  Stuart,  Dr.  Dowling,  Prof.  Chase,  and  others,  who 
denied  the  year-day  calculation  when  applied  to  the  2300 
days,  of  course  dissented  from  Mr.  Miller  on  this  point.    Dr. 

is  rendered  by  uwtTfify-ihjoav —  were  cut  off;  and  in  the  Venetian  copy 
by  rsT/Lit'ivrai  —  have  been  cut.  The  idea  of  cutting  off  is  pursued  in  the 
Vulgate,  where  the  phrase  is  '  abbreviate  sunt,'  have  been  shortened. 

"Thus  Chaldaic  and  Rabbinical  authority,  and  that  of  the  earliest 
versions,  —  the  Septuagint  and  Vulgate,  —  give  the  single  significa- 
tion OF  CUTTING  OFF  TO  THIS  VERB." 


MR.    MILLER   AND    HIS   REVIEWERS.  197 

Dowling  went  so  far  as  to  deny  (!)  that  the  Hebrew  article 
Hoi  (the)  is  in  the  phrase  "  the  vision,"  in  the  original  of 
Dan.  9  :   23. 

Of  those  who  admitted  the  year-day  theory,  Dr.  Hamil- 
ton, Dr.  Jarvis,  Mr.  Hinton,  and  Dr.  Pond,  denied  any 
connection  between  the  two  periods.  Dr.  Hamilton  com- 
menced the  2300  days  B.  c.  784,  and  ended  them  with  the 
era  of  the  Reformation,  A.  D.  1516.  The  others  did  not 
hazard  any  opinion  respecting  the  time  of  their  commence- 
ment. 

Mr.  Miller  wras  supposed  to  be  sustained  on  this  point  by 
Prof.  Bush,  who  did  not  consider  him  in  any  serious  error 
respecting  the  time.  And  Mr.  Shimeal  said,  "I  trust  it 
will  not  be  deemed  a  violation  of  that  modesty  which  becomes 
me,  if,  for  the  reasons  here  given,  I  withhold  my  assent 
from  the  conclusion  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Jarvis  on  this  subject ; 
which  is  that  the  seventy  wTeeks  form  no  part  of  the  two 
thousand  three  hundred  days." — p.  34. 

7.  The  Rise  of  the  Papacy —  the  Little  Horn  of  Dan. 
7th.  —  Mr.  Miller  claimed  that  the  one  thousand  two  hun- 
dred and  sixty  years  of  the  Papacy  wrere  to  be  reckoned  from 
a.  d.  538,  by  virtue  of  the  decree  of  Justinian.  This  decree, 
though  issued  A.  D.  533,  did  not  go  into  full  effect  until  538, 
when  the  enemies  of  the  Catholics  in  Rome  were  subjugated 
by  Belisarius,  a  general  of  Justinian.  In  this  view,  as  to  the 
rise  of  Papacy,  he  was  sustained  by  Croly  (see  his  work  on 
Apoc,  pp.  113—117);  G.  T.  Noel  (see  Prospects  of  Ch., 
p.  100)  ;  Wm.  Cunninghame,  Esq.  (Pol.  Destiny  of  the 
Earth,  p.  28)  ;  Keith,  vol.  1,  p.  93  ;  Encyclopedia  of  Rel. 
Knowl.,  art.  Antichrist;  Edward   King,  Esq.,  and  others. 

Prof.  Stuart  and  Prof.  Chase,  in  applying  this  little  horn 
to  Antiochus,  and  the  beast  of  the  Apocalypse  to  Nero,  ex- 
plained these  numbers  in  days,  satisfactorily  to  themselves. 

Dr.  Jarvis,  who  admitted  that  they  symbolize  years,  de- 
nied Mr.  Miller's  commencement,  without  assigning  any 
other.  He  said:  "  I  wrould  rather  imitate  the  caution  of  the 
learned  Mr.  Mede,  with  regard  to  the  time  of  the  great 
apostasy,  '  and  curiously  inquire  not,  but  leave  it  unto  him 
who  is  the  Lord  of  times  and  seasons.' ;? 

And  of  the  1260, 1290,  and  1335  days,  Mr.  Dowling  said : 
"  If  I  am  asked  the  question,  —  As  you  reject  the  interpre- 


198  LIFE    01   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

tation  Mr.  Miller  gives  of  these  prophetic   times. 

furnish  a   tetter  1   I  reply.  I  do  not  feel  hound  to 

furnish  any"  !  —  Reply  to  3L.  p.  25. 

Dr.  Hamilton  rather  agreed  with  Faber  and  Scott,  in 
dating  from  the  decree  of  Phocns,  A.  D.  606. 

Mr.  Shimeal  sustained  Mr.  MiHei  in  dating  from  the  de- 
cree of  Justinian,  but  reckoned  from  the  date  of  its  issue. 
instead  of  from  its  going  into  effect, —  p.  45. 

8.    The  Coming  of  Christ.  —  Mr.  1  ided  that 

this  was  to  be  literal  and  personal  This  waa  the  view  w 
had  been  entertained  by  the  church  in  all  ages,  and  is  recog- 
nized in  the  formulas  of  faith  adopted  by  ;di  evangelical 
churches.  Whether  his  CMnii:^  is  ::■  he  pre  or  post  rr;i- 
lennial.  is  another  quest:::;  :  hut  that  Christians,  in  ah  ages. 
have  believed  that  Christ  will  come  agaro  in  person  to  judge 
the  world,  will  not  be  questioned 

That  Christ  will  ever  thus  return  v  ued  by  Prof. 

Stuart  and  Prof.  Bush.  The  former  s:::l  thai  he  had 
"a  deeper  conviction  thaneYex  of  the  difficulties  which 
attend  the   supposition    of  a, 

descent  of  Christ  and  the  glorified  saints  to  the  earth."  — 
Hints,  2d  ed..  p.  153.  Again:  "Ah  the  prophecies  re- 
specting the  Messiah  are  invested  with  the  sostume  ::  figur- 
ative language." — Po..  p.  183.  And  again  :  "  Christ  him- 
self assumed  a  visible  appearance,"  at  his  first  advent, 
that   he  might  take  on  him  our  nature  for  sin. 

When  he  appears  a  second  time,  there  is  nc  necessity  for 
assuming  such  a  nature."  —  lb. .  p.  185. 

Prof.  Bush  gave,  as  his  opinion,  that  "  the  aecond  idvent 
of  the  Saviour  is  not  affirmed  to  he  personal,  but  spirit 
and  providential ;  and  tha:  the  event  sc  len  :s  to 

be  considered  as  having  entered  upon  its  incipient  fulfilment 
at  a  very  early  period  of  the  Christian  dispensation.2 '  —  Anas- 
tasis.   p.  9. 

Mr.  Dowling  and  others,  whe  admitted  the  personal  com- 
ing of  Christ  at  the  close  of  the  millennium,  claimed  td  t 
the  predicted  reign  o:  Christ  no  earth  during  that  period 
is  to  be  spirit 

But  Mr.  Shimeal  sustained  Mr.  Miller  in  ias  belief  thai 
the  advent  will  be  personal  and  pre-millenmal.  And 
Bishop  Hopkins,  of  Vermont  (Two  Discourses  on  the  Ad- 


MR.    MILLER  AND   HIS  REVIEWERS.  199 

vent),  while  he  claimed  that  the  time  was  not  revealed,  said, 
nevertheless,  "we  would  admonish  you,  with  still  greater 
earnestness,  to  keep  your  souls  in  constant  readiness  for  your 
Lord's  advent,  and  in  a  state  of  sacred  desire  to  behold  him 
in  his  glory."  —  p.  29. 

9.  The  Return  of  the  Jews. —  Mr.  Miller  looked  for 
no  return  of  the  Jews  previous  to  the  resurrection  of  the 
just ;  and  the  righteous  of  that  nation,  who  have  died  in  the 
faith  of  Abraham,  with  all  Gentile  believers  of  like  precious 
faith,  he  regarded  as  the  subjects  of  all  unfulfilled  promises 
to  Israel, —  the  fulfilment  of  which  will  be  in  the  new  earth, 
and  in  the  resurrection  out  from  among  the  dead. 

That  the  promise  to  Abraham  has  reference  to  the  resur- 
rection state,  is  no  novel  or  unscriptural  view. 

Rabbi  Eliezer  the  Great,  supposed  to  have  lived  just  after 
the  second  temple  was  built,  applied  Hosea  14  :  8  to  the 
pious  Jews,  who  seemed  likely  to  die  without  seeing  the  glory 
of  Israel,  saying :  "  As  I  live,  saith  Jehovah,  I  will  raise  you 
up  in  the  resurrection  of  the  dead ;  and  I  will  gather  you 
with  all  Israel." 

The  Sadducees  are  reported  to  have  asked  Rabbi  Gamaliel, 
the  preceptor  of  Paul,  whence  he  would  prove  that  God 
would  raise  the  dead  ;  who  quoted  Deut.  9  :  21  :  "  Which 
land  the  Lord  sware  that  he  would  give  to  your  fathers." 
He  argued,  as  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  had  it  not,  and  as 
God  cannot  lie,  that  they  must  be  raised  from  the  dead  to 
inherit  it. 

Rabbi  Simai,  though  of  later  date,  argues  the  same  from 
Ex.  6  :  4,  insisting  that  the  law  asserts  in  this  place  the  res- 
urrection from  the  dead,  when  it  said,  "And  also  I  have 
established  my  covenant  with,  them,  to  give  them  the  Ca- 
naan ;  "  for,  he  adds,  "it  is  not  said  to  you,  but  to  them." 

Mennasseh  Ben  Israel  says  :  "  It  is  plain  that  Abraham 
and  the  rest  of  the  patriarchs  did  not  possess  that  land ;  it 
follows,  therefore,  that  they  must  be  raised  in  order  to  enjoy 
the  promised  good,  as,  otherwise,  the  promises  of  God  would 
be  vain  and  false." — De  Resurrect.  Mort.,  L.  i.,  c.  1,  sec.  4. 

Rabbi  Saahias  Gaion,  commenting  on  Dan.  12  :  2,  says  : 
"This  is  the  resuscitation  of  the  dead  Israel,  whose  lot  is 
eternal  life,  and  those  who  shall  not  awake  are  the  forsakers 
of  Jehovah." 

18 


200  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

"  In  the  world  to  come,"  says  the  Sahar,  fol.  81,  "  the 
blessed  God  will  vivify  the  dead  and  raise  them  from  their 
dust,  so  that  they  shall  be  no  more  an  earthly  structure." 

Of  the  early  Christian  fathers,  Irenseus,  Eusebius,  Chry- 
sostom,  Ambrose,  Agustine,  Jerome,  and  others,  looked  for 
no  return  of  the  Jews  previous  to  the  resurrection,  though 
some  of  them  convey  the  idea  that  the  risen  saints  are  then 
to  be  trained  for  a  higher  glory. 

Luther,  Calvin,  and  many  other  divines  of  the  era  of  the 
Reformation,  apply  the  promises  to  Abraham  in  a  like 
manner ;  as  do  many  divines  of  the  present  time. 

Of  those  who  entered  the  lists  against  Mr.  Miller,  Dr. 
Dowling,  Mr.  Shimeal,  and  Dr.  Hamilton,  strenuously  con- 
tended for  the  return  of  the  Jews  in  the  flesh  to  Palestine. 

Prof.  Stuart  sustained  Mr.  Miller  so  far  as  the  question 
has  respect  to  the  true  Israel,  applying  the  promises  to  all 
who  are  of  the  faith  of  Abraham. 

10.  The  Epoch  of  the  Resurrection.  —  Mr.  Miller  held 
that  the  resurrection  of  the  just  will  be  pre -millennial,  and 
that  that  of  the  wicked  will  be  at  the  close  of  the  millennium. 
This  hinges  on  the  interpretation  given  to  Rev.  20  :  4 — 6. 
It  is  worthy  of  note,  that  during  the  first  two  centuries 
there  was  not  an  individual  who  believed  in  any  resurrection 
of  the  dead,  whose  name  or  memory  has  come  down  to  us, 
who  denied  that  a  literal  resurrection  is  there  taught. 

Eusebius  admits  that  Papias  was  a  disciple  of  John  the 
Evangelist,  and  that  he  taught  that,  "  after  the  resurrection 
of  the  dead,  the  kingdom  of  Christ  shall  be  established  cor- 
poreally on  this  earth." — [Hist.  Lib.  3,  Sec.  39.]  And 
Jerome  quotes  Papias  [De  Script.  Eccles.]  as  saying,  that 
"  he  had  the  apostles  for  his  authors,  and  that  he  considered 
what  Andrew,  what  Peter  said,  what  Philip,  what  Thomas 
said,  and  other  disciples  of  the  Lord."  Irenseus  taught 
that  at  the  resurrection  of  the  just  the  meek  should  inherit 
the  earth;  and  that  then  would  be  fulfilled  the  promise 
which  God  made  to  Abraham. 

Justyn  Martyr,  who  was  born  A.  D.  89,  seven  years 
before  the  Revelations  were  written,  says  that  he  and  many 
others  are  of  this  mind,  "  that  Christ  shall  reign  personally 
on  earth,"  and  that  "  all  who  were  accounted  orthodox  so 
believed."     He  also  says,    "  A  certain  man  among  us, 


MR.    MILLER   AND   HIS   REVIEWERS.  201 

whose  name  is  John,  being  one  of  the  twelve  apostles  of 
Christ,  in  that  Revelation  which  was  shown  to  him,  proph- 
esied that  those  who  believe  in  our  Christ  shall  fulfil  a 
thousand  years  at  Jerusalem." 

Tertullian,  who  wrote  about  A.  d.  180,  says  it  was  a 
custom  of  his  times  for  Christians  to  pray  that  they  might 
have  part  in  the  first  resurrection  ;  and  Cyprian,  who  lived 
about  A.  d.  220,  says  that  Christians  "had  a  thirst  for 
martyrdom,  that  they  might  obtain  a  better  resurrection," 
— the  martyrs  being  raised  at  the  commencement  of  the 
thousand  years. 

The  first  of  whom  we  have  any  account  that  opposed 
this  doctrine  was  Origen,  in  the  middle  of  the  third  century, 
who  styled  those  who  adhered  to  it  "the  simpler  sort  of 
Christians."  Mosheim  assures  us  that  the  opinion  "that 
Christ  was  to  come  and  reign  a  thousand  years  among  men  " 
had,  before  the  time  of  Origen,  "  met  with  no  opposition." 
—Ch.  Hist.,  vol.  1,  p.  284. 

At  the  era  of  the  Reformation  this  doctrine  was  revived, 
and  taught  by  Luther  and  Melancthon  ;  it  is  in  the  confession 
of  Augsburg  (a.  d.  1530)  ;  was  the  belief  of  Latimer, 
Cranmer,  and  Ridley ;  is  in  the  Articles  of  the  Church  (Ed. 
vi.,  A.  d.  1552)  ;  is  not  denied  in  the  more  prominent  creeds 
and  confessions  of  faith  of  the  churches,  and  was  believed  by 
Mede,  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  Bishop  Newton,  Milton,  Knox, 
Bunyan,  Gill,  Cowper,  Heber,  Pollok,  Greswell,  and  many 
other  distinguished  names  of  modern  times. 

This  point  was  vital  to  Mr.  Miller's  theory,  for,  however 
correct  he  might  be  in  his  time,  without  this  event  he  must 
fail  in  his  application  of  prophecy. 

Prof.  Bush,  while  he  admitted  that  all  "the  leading 
periods  mentioned  by  Daniel  and  John  do  actually  expire 
about  this  age  of  the  world  "  {Letter  to  Mr.  M.,  p.  6), 
claimed  that  "  the  great  event  before  the  world  is  not  its 
physical  conflagration,  but  its  moral  regeneration?' — 

P.  ii. 

Mr.  Hinton  said:  "It  is  possible  we  may  have  reached 
the  goal  of  the  world's  moral  destiny.  It  is,  indeed,  our 
deliberate  opinion  that  we  are  in  the  general  period  of  ter- 
mination of  the  23d  century  alluded  to  by  the  prophet  .... 
and  that  the  events  alluded  to  in  the  phrase  c  then  shall  the 


202  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER.  J 

sanctuary  be  cleansed'  are  now  actually  passing  before  us.*' 
— p.  121.  But  he  considered  the  a$raM*i  resurrection 
from  death  in  trespasses  and  sins.*' — p.  336. 

Dr.  Dowling,  Dr.  Hamilton,  and  others,  while  they  did 
not  admit,  with  Prof.  Bush,  that  the  present  age  uis  just 
opening  upon  the  crowning  consummation  of  all  prophetic 
declarations."'  contended  that  the  millennium  ;,'is  to  be 
ushered  in.  not  by  a  literal  resurrection  of  the  bodies  of  the 
saints,  but  by  the  figurative  resurrection  of  the  holy  men  of 
all  past  ages,  in  the  numerous  instances  *of  eminent  piety 
that  shall  appear  in  every  nation  under  heaven."' — Dr.  H.. 
p.  30. 

Prof.  Stuart,  while  he  admitted  that  thevresurrection  here 
brought  to  view  was  a  resurrection  of  the  body,  limited  it  to 
the  martyrs,  and  denied  that  there  is  to  be  a  descent  of 
Christ  to  the  earth,  or  a  visible  reign,  of  the  martyrs  with 
him.  ^ 

Dr.  Jarvis  did  not  deny  the  event Jfor  which  Mr.  Miller 
looked:  and  Mr.  Shimeal  taught,  "with  Mr.  Miller,  the 
resurrection  of  the  glorified  saints,  and  their  visible  reign 
with  Christ  on  the  earth  ;  but  he  held  that  they  would  reign 
over  the  converted  nations,  and  denied  the  conflagration 
previous  to  the  end  of  the  thousand  years. 

And  Bishop  Hopkins  gave  as  his  opinion  that  the  con- 
summation uis  drawing  nigh:   how  nigh  none  can  tell." 

There  were  various  other  issues  between  Mr.  Miller  and 
his  reviewers ;  but  they  were  more  collateral  than  vital  to 
the  question  at  issue,  and  are  not,  therefore,  particularly 
noticed  in  this  connection. 

It  is  seen,  from  the  foregoing,  that  Mr.  Miller's  points, 
taken  separately,  were  not  new  or  original  with  him :  and 
that  the  peculiarity  of  his  theory  consisted  in  putting  them 
together  :  and  that,  while  none  of  his  opposers  condemned 
the  whole,  and  each  point  separately  was  admitted  by  some 
of  them,  there  was  no  more  unanimity  among  them,  than 
between  him  and  them.  They  had  not  only  to  battle  with 
Mr.  Miller's  theory,  but  each  had  to  disprove  those  of  the 
others. 

It  was,  therefore,  not  surprising  that  the  reviewers  of 
Mr.  Miller  made  no  impression  on  those  who  held  his 
opinions.     It  was  seen  that  to  oppose  him  they  were  ready 


MR.    MILLER   AND   HIS   REVIEWERS.  203 

to  abandon  old  established  principles  of  Protestant  interpre- 
tation. Even  the  "Boston  Recorder"  (Orthodox  Cong.) 
said  :  "It  must  needs  be  acknowledged  that  our  faith 

IS  GREATLY  SHAKEN  IN  THE  INTERPRETATIONS  ON  WHICH, 
IN  COMMON  WITH   MOST  OF  OUR  OWN  BRETHREN,  WE    HAVE 

heretofore  relied,  and  which  forms  the  FOUNDA- 
TION of  the  baseless  theories  of  Miller!  "     And  the 

i:  Christian  Advocate  and  Journal  "  (Meth.  Epis.)  said  : 
"  If  his  (Prof.  Chase's)  views  in  regard  to  the  prophecies  of 
Daniel  be  correct,  the  long-established  opinion,  that  the 
Roman  empire  is  the  fourth  kingdom  of  the  prophet,  must 
give  way  to  the  more  successful  researches  of  Dr.  Chase. 
Some  other  opinions,  which  have  been  thought  to  be  settled 
beyond  a  doubt,  ARE  TERRIBLY   SHAKEN." 

Those  who  adhered  to  the  established  principles  of  inter- 
pretation did  not  fail  to  perceive  that  Prof.  Stuart,  Dr. 
Dowling,  and  Prof.  Chase,  &c,  had  not  fairly  met  Mr. 
Miller,  and  that  their  expositions  would  not  stand  the  test  of 
sound  criticism. 

Of  Professors  Stuart  and  Bush  the  New  York  Evange- 
list said  :  "  The  tendency  of  these  views  is  to  destroy  the 
Scripture  evidence  of  the  doctrine  of  any  real  end  of  the 
world,  any  day  of  final  judgment,  or  general  resurrection 
of  the  body.  The  style  of  interpretation,  we  assert,  tends 
fearfully  to  Univer sails m.  This  tendency  we  are  prepared 
to  prove." 

The  Hartford  "  Universalist "  said  of  Professor  Stuart: 
"  He  puts  an  uncompromising  veto  upon  the  popular  inter- 
pretations of  Daniel  and  Revelation,  and  unites  with  Uni- 
versalists  in  contending  that  most  of  their  contents  had 
special  reference  to,  and  their  fulfilment  in,  scenes  and 
events  which  transpired  but  a  few  years  after  those  books 
were  written."—  Oct.  15,  1842. 

Mr.  Hinton  said  of  the  same  :  "  We  regret  that,  in 
the  midst  of  the  great  moral  conflict  with  Antichrist, 
which  is  now  carrying  on,  those  into  whose  hands  the  saints 
were  so  long  :  given'  should  find  so  able  a  coadjutor.  We 
have,  however,  no  fears  that  Christians  of  sound  common 
sense,  and  capable  of  independent  thought,  will,  after  a  can- 
did consideration  of  the  scheme  which  excludes  Papacy  from 
the  page  of  prophecy,  and  that  which  traces  in  the  prophetic 
18* 


204  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER* 

symbols  a  faithful  portraiture  of  its  abominations,  make  a 
wrong  decision.  Since  we  have  read  the  work  of  the  learned 
Stuart,  we  have  rejoiced  the  more  that  our  humble  abilities 
have  been  directed  to  the  defence  of  the  old  paths."  — 
Proph,  Illus..  p.  231. 

Of  Mr.  Dowling.  Dr.  Breckenfcridge  said:  —  "As  for 
this  disquisition  of  Mr.  Dowling.  we  may  confidently  say. 
that  it  is  hardly  to  be  conceived  that  anything  could  be 
printed  by  Mr.  Miller,  or  Mr.  Any-body-else.  more  shallow, 
absurd  and  worthless.  There  is  hardly  a  point  he  touches 
on  which  he  has  not  managed  to  adopt  the  very  idlest  con- 
jectures of  past  writers  on  the  prophecies:  and  this  so 
entirely  without  regard  to  any  coherent  system,  that  the  only 
clear  conviction  a  man  of  sense  or  reflection  could  draw  from 
his  pamphlet,  if  such  a  man  could  be  supposed  capable  of 
believing  it.  would  be  that  the  prophecies  themselves  area 
jumble  of  nonsense.  Such  answers  as  his  can  have  no 
effect,  we  would  suppose,  except  to  bring  the  whole  subject 
into  ridicule,  or  to  promote  the  cause  he  attacks."  — 
Spirit  of  the  19th  Century.  March  Xo..  1843. 

Again  he  says,  in  speaking  of  "  the  general  ignorance 
which  prevails  on  this  subject.*'*  that  of  it  "no  greater  evi- 
dence need  be  produced  than  the  fact  that  this  pamphlet  of 
Mr.  Dowling  has  been  extensively  relied  on.  vea.  preached. 
as  a  sufficient  answer  "  to  Mr.  Miller. 

On  surveying  the  whole  field  of  controversy.  Professor 
Bush,  while  he  claimed  that  the  Spiritualists  were  nearer 
the  truth,  said  of  them  :  "  They  have  not  answered  the  argu- 
ments of  their  opponents,  nor  can  they  do  it  on  the  ground 
which  they  themselves  professedly  occupy  in  respect  to  a 
millennium.  Assuming  that  that  period  is  yet  future,  and 
its  commencement  of  no  distant  date,  the  Literalists.  or  Ad- 
ventists.  bear  down  with  overwhelming  weight  of  argument 
upon  them,  maintaining  that  the  Second  Coming  precedes 
and  ushers  in  that  sublime  era.  The  Spiritualists  say  nay. 
but  refuse  to  commit  themselves  to  a  defined  position.  All 
that  they  know  is.  that  there  is  to  be  a  millennium  of  some 
kind,  occurring  at  some  time,  introduced  in  some  way.  and 
brought  to  an  end  from  some  cause  ;  and  that  immediately 
thereupon  the  Lord  is  to  descend  from  heaven,  burn  up  the 
earth,  raise  the  dead,  and  administer  the  judgment :  but  as 


MR.    MILLER   AND   HIS   REVIEWERS.  205 

to  the  what,  the  when,  the  how,  the  why  —  on  these  points 
they  rest  content  in  knowing  nothing,  because  of  the 
impression  taken  up  that  nothing  is  to  be  known" — N. 
C.  Repos.,  1849,  p.  248. 

Dr.  Jarvis,  in  his  sermons,  was  particularly  severe  on  Mr. 
Miller,  but  afterwards  did  him  ample  justice,  as  in  the  fol- 
lowing. He  said  :  "Mr.  Miller,  in  his  eagerness  to  make  out 
his  scheme,  absolutely  falsifies  the  language  of  the  Bible. 
He  makes  Jehoram  to  have  reigned  five  years,  where  the 
Scripture  positively  says  he  reigned  eight ;  and  between 
Amaziah  and  Azariah,  or  Uzziah,  he  introduces  an  interreg- 
num of  eleven  years,  for  wThich  he  has  not  even  the  shadow 
of  an  authority  in  the  Bible.  He  quotes,  indeed,  chapters 
14th  and  15th  of  the  2d  book  of  Kings ;  and  this  may  be 
sufficient  for  those  who  are  ready  to  take  his  opinions  upon 
trust.  But,  if  you  examine  the  chapters  to  which  he  refers, 
you  will  be  astonished  to  find  that  there  is  not  in  either  of 
them  one  word  upon  the  subject." — Sermons,  p.  55. 

In  his  preface  to  his  sermons  Dr.  Jarvis  makes  the  fol- 
lowing correction  of  the  above.     He  says  : 

"It  will  be  seen  that  in  speaking  of  the  curtailment  of 
the  reign  of  Jehoram,  the  son  of  Jehoshaphat,  from  eight  to 
five  years,  and  the  introduction  of  eleven  years  of  interreg- 
num between  the  reigns  of  Amaziah  and  Uzziah,  he  has 
censured  Mr.  Miller  in  too  unmeasured  terms.  These  par- 
ticulars he  is  bound  to  explain. 

"It  would  have  been  easier,  and  perhaps  more  advan- 
tageous to  the  author,  to  have  made  the  alterations  silently, 
and  omitted  the  censure.  But  would  it  have  been  equally 
honest  ? 

"In  preparing  the  introductory  volume  of  his  c  Ecclesi- 
astical History,'  he  had  carefully  avoided  reading  modern 
writers  on  chronology,  for  fear  of  being  biased  by  their  sys- 
tems. For  this  reason  he  had  never  read  the  learned  work 
of  Dr.  Hales ;  and  though  familiar  with  Petavius,  Usher, 
and  Marsham,  a  good  while  had  elapsed  since  he  had  con- 
sulted them  on  the  parts  of  history  connected  with  the 
prophecies.  But  these  great  writers  being  entirely  silent  as 
to  any  interregnum  in  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  the  existence 
of  such  an  interregnum  was  entirely  a  new  idea  to  him. 
Mr.  Miller  quoted  2  Kings,  14,  15,  without  mentioning  the 


206  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

verses  from  which  he  drew  the  inference ;  and  it  was  not 
till  the  author  had  read  Dr.  Hales'  •  Analysis '  that  he  saw 
the  correctness  of  that  inference.  If  this  admission  gives 
Mr.  Miller  an  advantage,  he  is  fairly  entitled  to  it.  We 
cannot,  for  one  moment,  suppose  that  he  knew  anything 
about  Dr.  Hales  or  his  work.  As  a  plain,  unlettered  man, 
his  perspicuity  in  reading  his  Bible,  and  his  Bible  only,  is 
much  to  his  credit ;  and  we  ought  to  consider  it  as  giving 
additional  force  to  the  reasons  assigned  by  Dr.  Hales,  that 
an  ignorant  man,  as  Mr.  Miller  confessedly  is,  should,  from 
the  mere  examination  of  the  Bible,  have  arrived  at  the  same 
conclusion.  The  censure,  however,  in  the  sermon,  holds 
good  with  regard  to  the  reign  of  Jehoram,  the  son  of  Je- 
hoshaphat  (2  Kings  8  :  17  ;  2  Chron.  21  :  5)  ;  but,  being 
equally  applicable  to  Archbishop  Usher,  should  not  have 
been  laid  particularly  at  Mr.  Miller's  door." 


CHAPTEE  XV. 

HIS    TREATMENT   OF   OPPONENTS  —  SPECIMENS   OF  HIS   PREACHING 

COLLOQUIAL,    EXPOSTULATORY,    EXPOSITORY,    ETC. 

Mr.  Miller  did  not  consider  that  his  reviewers  always 
treated  him  and  his  arguments  with  the  utmost  fairness; 
and,  in  speaking  of  them,  he  sometimes  retorted  in  terms  of 
great  severity.  Considering  his  treatment,  by  the  religious 
and  secular  press,  and  the  contumely  which  was  incessantly 
heaped  on  him,  that  he  should,  at  times,  manifest  a  degree 
of  impatience,  was  more  an  occasion  of  regret  than  of  sur- 
prise. Few  men  have  been  called  to  endure  so  great  an 
amount  of  reproach  as  fell  to  his  lot ;  and  few  could  have 
endured  it  as  he  did.  He  was  human,  and  shared  in  all 
the  weaknesses  common  to  humanity ;  but,  whenever  he 
failed  to  endure  the  smart  of  undeserved  wounds  with  all 
the  sweetness  of  gospel  charity,  no  one  more  sincerely 
regretted  it  than  he  did ;  and  his  liability  to  err  in  this 
respect  was  with  him  a  subject  of  many  prayers  and  tears. 

His  severity,  however,  was  often  richly  merited ;  and  he 


SPECIMENS   OF   HIS   PREACHING.  207 

knew  how  to  be  severe,  without  being  uncourteous.  Those 
who  used  their  learning  to  fritter  away  the  plain  meaning 
of  Scripture,  and  to  make  it  teach  something  which  the  com- 
mon reader  would  never  have  perceived  in  it, —  merely  for 
the  purpose  of  opposing  his  conclusions, —  he  had  little 
inclination  to  spare. 

In  speaking  of  the  8th  chapter  of  Daniel,  and  the  ques- 
tion, "  How  long  shall  be  the  vision?"  he  says,  "The 
answer  is,   '  Unto  2300  days.'  " 

"  l  But,'  says  the  critic,  'it  is  "evenings-mornings."  ' 

"  No  matter  :  all  men  seem  to  understand  it  days  ;  for 
it  is  so  translated  in  every  language  with  which  we  are  ac- 
quainted at  the  present  day.  Therefore,  this  can  never  be 
made  plainer,  if  this  compound  Hebrew  word  should  be 
criticized  upon  until  the  judgment  shall  set.  I  am  sick  of 
this  continual  harping  upon  words.  Our  learned  critics  are 
worse  on  the  waters  of  truth  than  a  school  of  sharks  on  the 
fishing-banks  of  the  north,  and  they  have  made  more  infidels 
in  our  world  than  all  the  heathen  mythology  in  existence. 
What  word  in  revelation  has  not  been  turned,  twisted, 
racked,  wrested,  distorted,  demolished,  and  annihilated  by 
these  voracious  harpies  in  human  shape,  until  the  public 
have  become  so  bewildered  they  know  not  what  to  believe  ? 
1  They  have  fouled  the  waters  with  their  feet.'  I  have 
always  noticed  where  they  tread  the  religious  spirit  is  at  a 
low  ebb  ;  it  becomes  cold,  formal,  and  doubtful,  at  least.  It 
is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  we  want,  and  God's  word  then 
becomes  spirit  and  life  unto  us. 

"  '  The  words  "evenings-mornings"  convey  to  our  mind 
the  idea  of  days ;  thus  this  vision  is  2300  days  long,'  says 
the  reader. 

"  '  Yes.  But  how  can  all  this  be?'  says  the  inquiring 
mind.  l  Can  three  kingdoms  rise  up  and  become  great  ; 
from  a  small  people  become  a  strong  nation ;  conquer  all  the 
nations  of  the  earth,  and  then,  in  its  turn,  be  subdued  and 
conquered  by  a  kingdom  still  more  fortunate ;  and  so  on 
through  three  successive  kingdoms,  and  do  this  in  little  over 
six  years  ?     Impossible. ' 

"  i  But  God  has  said  it,  and  I  must  believe.  Now  the 
only  difficulty  is  in  time.' 

"  'How  can  this  be?' 


208  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    MILLER. 

i<  t  Very  well,'  says  the  dear  child  of  God ;  :  I  remember 
me  :  God  says  I  must  "  dig  for  the  truth  as  for  hid  treasure/' 
I  will  go  to  work,  and,  while  I  am  digging,  I  will  live  by 
begging.  Father  in  heaven,  I  believe  it  is  thy  word  ;  but  I 
do  not  understand  it :  show  me  thy  truth.' 

u  I  had  rather  have  one  humble  prayer  of  this  kind,  with 
an  English  Bible  in  my  hand,  than  all  the  Hebrew,  Greek, 
and  Latin  Bro.  S.  ever  knew. 

"  The  child  then  takes  the  word  day.  and  compares  spirit- 
ual things  with  spiritual,  to  find  what  his  heavenly  Father 
means  by  days  in  a  figurative  sense.  The  first  text  he  lights 
upon  is  in  Nam.  14  :   34,  *  each  day  for  a  year? 

;i  ''  May  this  not  be  it  ? '  says  the  child. 

"  He  takes  hold  of  it  by  faith,  carries  it  home,  lays  it  up 
in  his  cell  of  sweets,  richer  than  a  lord,  and  again  goes  forth 
in  search  of  more.  He  now  lights  upon  Eze.  4:6:  '  I 
have  appointed  thee  each  day  for  a  year?  He  is  now  rich 
in  very  deed  —  two  jewels  in  one  cell.  He  does  not  stop  to 
criticize,  like  a  Stuart,  and  query,  and  reason  himself  out  of 
common  sense  and  reason  too;  but,  Abraham-like,  he  be- 
lieves, and  lays  up  his  treasure  at  home. 

"  *  I  see,'  says  the  child,  •'  this  use  of  days  was  so  ordained 
by  my  Father  in  two  cases  ;  and  two  witnesses  are  enough. 
But  I  am  not  certain  that  I  have  a  right  to  use  these  jewels 
in  this  place.     I  will  go  and  beg,  and  dig  again.' 

"In  this  excursion  he  lights  on  Daniel  9:  23 — 27: 
'  Seventy  weeks  are  determined  upon  thy  people.' 

"  '  Seventy  weeks  of  what  ?  '  says  the  critic. 

"  - 1  do  not  care  a  fig,'  says  the  believing  child,  c  whether  you 
call  it  days  or  years :  I  know  how  long  it  was  in  fulfilling.' 

'  ■  •'  How  long  ? ' 

"  l  Exactly  four  hundred  and  ninety  years  :  from  the  decree 
given  in  the  seventh  year  of  Artaxerxes,  four  hundred  and 
fifty-seven  years  before  Christ,  unto  his  death,  thirty- three 
years  after  the  birth  of  Christ,  making  exactly  four  hundred 
and  ninety  years,  or  seventy  sevens  of  years  of  the  vision.'  " 

Prof.  Stuart  having  applied  the  days  in  Daniel  12th  to 
the  times  of  Antiochus,  when  the  context  shows  that  the 
resurrection  will  follow  their  termination,  Mr.  Miller  said  : 

11  Suppose  Prof.  Stuart  had  been  a  believing  Jew,  and 


SPECIMENS    OF  HIS    PREACHING.  209 

lived  in  the  time  of  Antiochus,  and  had  been  of  the  same 
mind  he  is  now.  or  says  he  is.  and  one  of  his  brother  Jews 
had  come  along  and  prophesied  or  preached  that  the  Jews 
were  to  be  a  scattered  and  a  peeled  people,  dashed  and 
scattered  among  all  nations,  more  than  two  thousand  years, 
then  to  come :  and  suppose  the  professor  had  been  then  an 
expounder  of  the  law  and  the  prophets,  and  was  called  upon 
to  explain  this  text  as  being  then  fulfilled,  what  would  he 
say  to  his  brother  Jew,  the  prophet?  He  would  say,  as  any 
man  must  say  by  him  : 

11  :  Sir,  you  are  a  false  prophet;  for  God  has  told  us 
plainly,  in  this  very  text,  that,  when  this  three  and  a  half 
years  are  fulfilled  under  which  we  are  now  groaning,  then 
our  scattering  or  dashing  will  be  accomplished  —  ye3,  and 
finished,  too.  So  says  the  word.  Therefore  do  you  keep 
away  from  my  flock  of  Pharisees,  for  I  do  not  want  my 
people  excited  by  your  false,  alarming  doctrine.  Do  you 
not  see  that,  at  the  end  of  1335  days,  Daniel  will  stand  in 
his  lot  3  And  do  you  not  see,  sir,  that  his  standing  in  his 
lot  means  the  resurrection  2  Read  the  first  three  verses  of 
this  chapter.' 

"  i  Ah,3  says  the  prophet,  i  that  does  not  mean  the  resur- 
rection, but ' 

"  :  But  what  V  says  the  professor. 

"  *  0  !  I  do  not  know  — difficult  to  understand,'  says  the 
prophet. 

"  •  I  see,'  says  the  professor,  'you  are  a  Sadducee.  You 
do  not  understand  either  the  Hebrew  or  the  Chaldaic,  or  the 
exegesis  of  the  Scriptures.  How  dare  you  prophesy  evil  of 
this  nation,  when  God  hath  spoken  peace  after  these  days  ? 
I  say  you  are  a  Sadducee.  I  will  have  no  fellowship  with 
you.     You  must  not  come  into  my  synagogue.' 

:  •  Would  not  this  be  the  natural  result  of  such  a  case  ?  I 
leave  it  for  the  reader  to  judge. 

'*  Or,  suppose  that  the  professor  was  now  in  controversy 
with  a  Jew,  —  a  Sadducee,  —  and  was  under  the  necessity 
of  proving  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  by  the  Old  Tes- 
tament, would  he  not  put  into  requisition  this  very  text,  and 
prove  by  the  same  a  resurrection  unto  eternal  life  ;  and,  if 
he  did  not  believe  such  plain  and  positive  proofs  as  these 
texts  would  be,  would  he  not  consider  him  a  poor,  blinded 


210  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM  MILLER. 

Sadducee  ?  Let  us  be  careful  that  our  own  mouths  do  not 
condemn  us. 

u  If,  then,  these  days  can  only  end  with  the  resurrection, 
it  is  impossible  that  these  Scriptures  can  apply  to  Antiochus. 
And,  as  the  rules  which  he  has  given  us  in  his  Hints  are  the 
same,  in  substance,  which  I  was  forced  to  adopt  more  than 
twenty  years  ago,  I  cannot  believe  that  Antiochus  Epiphanes 
is  even  hinted  at  from  Daniel  11  :  14  to  the  end  of  the  12th 
chapter.  And,  if  the  prophecy  does  not  belong  to  Antiochus, 
then  he  must  acknowledge  that  the  little  horn  can  apply 
only  to  the  Papal  power ;  and  must  agree  with  nearly  all 
Protestant  writers  that '  time,  times,  and  a  half,'  are,  together 
with  the  other  numbers  in  this  chapter,  to  be  understood  in 
a  symbolical  sense." 

In  wrriting,  he  sometimes  indulged  in  a  colloquial  style. 
In  the  following  he  hints  at  an  objection  often  urged  against 
him,  that  he,  being  a  farmer,  should  not  presume  to  teach. 
He  says : 

"  As  it  was  in  the  days  of  Noah,  so  shall  it  be  in  the 
days  of  the  Son  of  Man.  They  were  eating  and  drink- 
ing, marrying  and  giving  in  marriage,  until  Noah  entered 
into  the  ark.  Methinks  I  can  almost  see  the  scenes  of  that 
day.  See  you  not  that  elegant  building  yonder,  near  that 
ark  of  gopher- wood  ?  That  building  was  reared  at  a  great 
expense,  by  the  host,  for  the  purpose  of  entertaining  strangers 
who  might  come  to  visit  that  ark,  and  to  ridicule  and  laugh 
at  that  old,  white-headed  man  you  see  yonder  pitching  the 
ark.  The  host,  you  see,  has  become  rich  by  the  great  gain 
he  has  made,  from  the  furnishing  of  the  workmen,  citizens 
and  strangers,  with  food  and  drink  of  the  most  costly  kind. 
Look  into  the  dining-hall  of  that  establishment.  See  the 
table  loaded  with  all  the  delicate  viands  of  the  season.  See 
those  bottles  filled  with  the  sparkling  juice  of  the  grape. 
See  the  host  at  his  door,  beckoning  to  each  passer-by  to 
enter  and  regale  himself.  Hear  the  conversation  between 
the  host  and  the  stranger  guest  who  has  just  entered  his 
mansion  : 

"  Guest.  What  great  building  is  that  in  yonder  field,  on 
that  eminence  ? 

"  Host.     That  is  called  <  Noah's  Ark.' 

"  Guest.     But  what  use  is  he  going  to  put  it  to?    It 


SPECIMENS   OF  HIS   PREACHING.  211 

seems  to  be  built  for  sailing.  Surely  the  old  man  does  not 
expect  to  sail  on  dry  land. 

"  Host.  Yes  :  you  are  right  The  old  man  says  the 
world  is  coming  to  an  end  (Gen.  6  :  13),  and  he  has  pre- 
pared an  ark  to  save  himself  and  family ;  for  all  flesh  will 
be  destroyed  by  water,  as  he  says. 

"  Gaest.     But  how  does  he  know  this  ? 

u  Host.     He  says  God  told  him. 

"  Guest.  What  kind  of  a  man  is  he?  He  must  be  a 
great  fanatic,  I  am  thinking. 

u  Host.  Why,  yes  ;  we  think  he  is  crazy  a  little  ;  bu*j 
you  cannot  discover  it  in  anything  else  but  his  building  that 
great  ark,  and  neglecting  his  farm  and  other  worldly  matters. 
But  what  he  has  lost  I  have  gained. 

u  Guest  A  farmer,  say  you?  —  a  farmer  !  Why  did 
not  God  tell  some  of  our  '  mighty  men,  which  are  men  of 
renown*?  (Gen.  6:4.)  A  farmer,  too!  There  is  no 
truth  in  it.     But  do  any  believe  him  ? 

"  Host.  Believe  him  !  No.  We  have  other  things  to 
attend  to,  and  cannot  spend  time  to  hear  the  old  farmer. 
But  we  were  all  very  much  startled,  no  longer  ago  than  yes- 
terday ;  for  the  old  man  has  been  telling  some  that  he  had 
prepared  rooms  for  the  beasts  of  the  field,  and  for  the  fowls 
of  the  air,  and  every  creeping  thing ;  and  yesterday  they 
came,  two  and  two  of  every  sort,  and  entered  the  ark,  appar- 
ently of  their  own  accord.  (Gen.  7  :  8,  9.)  This,  you 
may  be  sure,  startled  us  some  :  but  the  banquets  and  feasts 
of  last  night  have  dissipated  the  fears  of  all,  and  to-day 
things  are  as  they  should  be. 

H  Guest.  It  is  rather  strange;  yet  it  cannot  be  true. 
God  will  not  destroy  the  world  in  the  midst  of  this  hilarity 
and  glee,  and  in  the  height  of  all  these  improvements  at  the 
present  day.  Much,  much  of  the  earth  remains  yet  to  be 
cultivated  and  inhabited.  Our  western  wilderness  is  yet  to 
be  explored  and  settled.  Then  the  world  is  yet  in  its 
infancy  —  not  two  thousand  years  old  yet ;  and  you  know 
we  have  a  tradition  that  the  earth  is  to  wax  old  like  a  gar- 
ment. It  cannot  be  true,  what  the  old  man  tells  you.  I  will 
warrant  you  the  earth  will  stand  many  thousand  years  yet. 

"  Host.  Look!  look!  there  goes  the  old  fool  and  his 
family  now,  I  dare  say,  into  the  ark.  I  remember  me  now, 
19 


212  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

the  old  man  told  us,  four  days  ago.  that,  in  seven  days 
(Gen.  7  :  4 — 10),  God  would  cause  it  to  rain  sufficient  to 
destroy  every  living  thing  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  I 
shall  have  a  chance  to  laugh  at  the  old  man  four  days  hence. 
I  told  him  to  his  face  that,  after  his  seven  days  were  ended, 
he  would  be  ashamed  to  preach  any  more,  and  we  should 
have  some  quiet  then. 

"  Guest.  But  do  your  priests  let  him  preach  in  their 
congregations  and  societies? 

u  Host.  0  no  !  by  no  means;  that  is,  none  that  are 
called  respectable,  or  of  the  higher  class.  Why,  sir,  they 
held  a  meeting  last  night  at  my  banqueting  house.  After 
the  cloth  was  removed,  and  while  the  wine  was  circulating 
freely,  old  Noah  was  the  subject  of  the  toast.  And  it  would 
have  done  you  good  to  have  heard  their  sharp  cuts  and 
squibs  ;  it  caused  a  roar  of  laughter  among  the  guests.  See, 
yonder  come  some  of  them  now.  Let  us  go  in,  and  enjoy 
another  treat.     {They  go  in.) 

u  Ah,  said  I,  were  these  scenes  acted  before  the  flood, 
and  will  it  be  so  in  the  end  of  the  world  1  And  will  the 
generation  of  the  righteous  not  pass  off  until  they  behold 
these  things  acted  over  again  ?  So  says  our  blessed  Saviour, 
and  so  I  believe. 

"  Then  shall  '  heaven  and  earth  pass  away.'  The  right- 
eous will  pass  off  to  meet  their  Lord,  and  the  wicked  be  con- 
sumed to  cleanse  the  world.  Then  will  the  prophecy  in  this 
chapter  be  fulfilled,  and  '  the  word  of  God  will  not  pass  away.' 

"  Prepare,  ye  servants  of  the  Most  High,  to  render  up 
your  stewardship.  Ye  scoffers,  take  warning ;  cease  your 
revilings,  your  newspaper  squibs,  your  bombast,  your  revel- 
lings,  and  your  banquetings.  And  you,  my  dear  reader, 
prepare  !  prepare  !  for  lo  !  — 

6  He  comes,  lie  comes,  the  Judge  severe; 
The  seventh  trumpet  speaks  him  near.'  " 

The  foregoing  will  also  serve  as  a  specimen  of  his  mode, 
at  times,  of  addressing  an  audience.  At  other  times  he  was 
very  earnest  and  solemn.  In  arguing  that  we  must  be 
beyond  the  end  of  the  1260  days  of  Daniel  and  John,  from 
the  fact  that  the  church  is  not  now  in  the  wilderness,  he 
said : 


SPECIMENS   OF   HIS   PREACHING.  213 

Cl  Can  we  be  mistaken  in  the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy? 
Is  the  church  now  in  the  wilderness  ?  And  if  you  should 
respond,  She  is. —  I  ask  you,  When,  then,  was  she  out?  Not 
in  the  apostolic  age ;  for  she  was  not  more  free  then  than 
now.  And  then,  let  me  inquire,  where  are  your  twelve  hun- 
dred and  sixty  years?  They  can  have  no  meaning.  0, 
Christian !  I  beg  of  you,  believe  in  the  word  of  God ;  do 
not,  I  pray  3rou,  discard  time,  any  more  than  manner.  Is  it 
not  selfishness  in  us  to  discard  the  set  times  which  God  has 
fixed,  and  not  man  ?  Where  is  our  faith  ?  Why  are  we  so 
slow  of  heart  to  believe  ?  Three  times  we  have  witnessed, 
—  yes,  in  the  lifetime  of  some  of  us,  —  the  fulfilment  of 
the  '  time,  times,  and  an  half,'  in  the  accomplishment  of  the 
'forty-two  months,'  in  the  completion  of  the  'twelve  hun- 
dred and  three-score  days,'  and  yet,  0  God,  we  refuse  to 
believe !  Shame  on  that  professor  who  will  not  open  his 
eyes ! 

"  They  tell  us  we  cannot  understand  prophecy  until  it  is 
fulfilled. 

"  But  here  it  is  three  times  fulfilled  in  this  day  in  which  we 
live.  What  excuse  have  you  now,  0  ye  heralds  of  the  cross  ? 
Ah  !  say  you,  that  is  your  construction  ;  wTe  are  not  bound 
to  follow  your  explanations.  No,  no  !  But  for  ages  you 
and  your  fathers  have  been  telling  us  that  these  prophecies 
were  true ;  and  you  have  told  us  that  when  they  come  to 
pass  we  should  know  what  they  meant ;  and,  although  ages 
on  ages  have  rolled  their  rapid  course,  yet  nothing  has  tran- 
spired, as  you  will  own ;  and  we,  if  we  should  search,  and 
find,  as  we  believe,  the  prophecies  fulfilling,  and  tell  our 
reasons,  you  then  can  taunt  us  with  a  sceptic  argument, — 
'this  is  your  construction,'  —  and  then  not  dare  to  tell 
us  what  it  means !  Awake,  awake,  ye  shepherds  of  the 
flock !  Come,  tell  us  why  these  things  are  not  fulfilled. 
Deceive  us  not.  You  stand  upon  the  walls,  both  night  and 
day  ;  then  tell  us  what  it  means.  We  have  a  right  to  ask, 
'Watchman,  what  of  the  night?  Watchman,  what  of  the 
night  ? '  An  answer  we  must  have ;  or  you  must  leave  your 
towers.  It  will  not  do  to  answer  us,  '  I  am  under  no  obli- 
gation to  tell  you.'*  Has  Zion  no  better  watchmen  on  her 
walls   than   this  ?     Alas !    alas !    then  we   may  sleep,  and 

*  Bowling's  Reply  to  Miller. 


214  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

sleep,  until  the  trumpet's  dreadful  blast  shall  shake  our  dusty 
beds,  and  the  last  angel  raise  his  hand  and  swear  c  that  time 
shall  be  no  longer.'  Why  are  you  thus  negligent  and 
remiss  in  duty  ?  If  I  am  not  right  in  my  construction  of 
God's  holy  word,  pray  tell  us  what  is  truth,  and  make  it 
look  more  plain, —  and  will  we  not  believe  ?  Thus  you  will 
cleanse  your  garments  from  our  blood,  and  we  must  bear 
the  shame.  What  time  of  night?  Come,  tell  us  plainly. 
There  are  portentous  clouds  hanging  over  our  heads ;  we 
hear  the  murmurs  of  the  fitful  winds ;  we  see  sad  omens  of 
a  dreadful  storm:  and  where  is  our  watchman's  voice? 
Your  silence  gives  us  fears  that  we  are  betrayed.  Awake  ! 
awake  !  Ye  watchmen,  to  your  post !  It  is  no  false  alarm. 
There  are  judgments,  heavy  judgments,  at  the  door.  4  Our 
God  shall  come,  and  shall  not  keep  silence :  a  fire  shall 
devour  before  him,  and  it  shall  be  very  tempestuous  round 
about  him.  He  shall  call  to  the  heavens  from  above,  and 
to  the  earth,  that  he  may  judge  his  people.'  How  shall 
the  fearful  stand  in  that  great  day,  when  heaven  and  earth 
shall  hear  his  mighty  voice,  and  they  that  hear  must  come 
to  judgment?  Where  will  the  unbelieving  scoffer  then 
appear  ?  When  God  makes  inquisition  for  the  blood  of  souls, 
and  when  the  under-shepherds  stand,  with  their  flocks, 
around  the  '  great  white  throne,'  to  have  each  motive, 
thought,  word,  act,  and  deed,  brought  out  to  light,  before  a 
gazing  world,  and  tried  by  that  unerring  rule,  '  the  word.' 
—  I  ask  you,  scorner,  jester,  scoffer,  how  will  you  appear  ? 
Stop,  stop,  and  think,  before  you  take  a  fatal  leap,  and  jest 
away  your  soul !  " 

In  closing  a  discourse  on  the  text,  "  We  shall  reign  on 
the  earth,"  he  thus  proceeds  : 

"  We  shall  reign  on  the  earth,  says  our  text.  Not  under 
its  present  dispensation,  but  after  it  is  cleansed  by  fire  ;  after 
the  wicked  are  destroyed  by  fire,  as  the  antediluvians  were  by 
water ;  after  the  resurrection  of  the  saints,  and  when  Christ's 
prayer,  taught  to  his  disciples,  shall  be  answered,  '  Thy  will 
be  done  on  earth,  even  as  in  heaven.'  When  the  bride  has 
made  herself  ready,  and  is  married  to  the  bridegroom,  he  will 
then  move  her  into  the  New  Jerusalem  state,  prepared  as  a 
bride  adorned  for  her  husband,  where  we  shall  reign  with  him 
for  ever  and  ever,  on  the  new  earth  and  in  the  new  heavens ; 


SPECIMENS   OF  HIS   PREACHING.  215 

c  and  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes,  and 
there  shall  be  no  more  death,  neither  sorrow  nor  crying, 
neither  shall  there  be  any  more  pain ;  for  the  former  things 
are  passed  away.'  Then  the  whole  earth  '  shall  be  full  of 
his  glory ; '  and  then,  as  says  the  prophet  Isaiah,  54 :  5, 
'  For  thy  Maker  is  thine  husband ;  the  Lord  of  Hosts  is  his 
name ;  and  thy  Redeemer,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel ;  the  God 
of  the  whole  earth  shall  he  be  called.' 

u  And  then,  my  dear  hearer,  if  you  have  had  your  heart 
broken  off  from  sin ;  if  you  have  by  faith  been  united  in 
spirit  to  the  Lamb  of  God ;  if  you  have  patiently  endured 
tribulation  and  persecution  for  his  name, —  then  you  will 
live  and  reign  with  him  on  the  earth,  and  this  earth  will  be 
regenerated  by  fire  and  the  power  of  God ;  the  curse  de- 
stroyed ;  sin,  pain,  crying,  sorrow,  and  death,  banished  from 
the  world,  and  mortality  clothed  upon  by  immortality,  death 
swallowed  up  in  victory.  You  will  rise  up  in  that  general 
assembly,  and,  clapping  your  hands  with  joy,  cry,  '  Holy, 
holy,  holy  is  the  Lord  God  Almighty,  which  was,  and  is, 
and  is  note  corned  Then  you  will  be  in  a  situation  to  join 
the  grand  chorus,  and  sing  the  new  song,  saying,  '  Thou  art 
worthy,  for  thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  to  God 
by  thy  blood,  out  of  every  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people, 
and  nation,  and  hast  made  us  unto  our  God  kings  and  priests, 
and  we  shall  reign  on  the  earth,  saying,  with  a  loud  voice, 
Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  to  receive  power,  and 
riches,  and  wisdom,  and  strength,  and  honor,  and  glory,  and 
blessing.'  And  all  who  meet  in  that  grand  assembly  will 
be  then  heard  to  shout,  •  Blessing,  and  honor,  and  glory, 
and  power,  be  unto  Him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and 
unto  the  Lamb  for  ever  and  ever.'  And  methinks  I  can  now 
see  every  one  who  loves  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ 
in  this  assembly  rising  upon  their  feet,  and  in  one  united 
prayer  of  faith,  crying,  c  Come,  Lord  Jesus,  0  come 
quickly ! ' 

"  But  you,  0  impenitent  man  or  woman  !  where  will  you 
be  then?  When  heaven  shall  resound  with  the  mighty  song, 
and  distant  realms  shall  echo  back  the  sound,  where,  tell 
me,  where  will  you  be  then?  In  hell!  0  think  !  In  hell! 
—  a  dreadful  word !  Once  more  think !  In  hell !  lifting  up 
your  eyes,  being  in  torment.  Stop,  sinner  ;  think !  In  hell ! 
19* 


216  LIFE    OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

where  shall  be  weeping,  wailing,  and  gnashing  of  teeth. 
Stop,  sinner,  stop ;  consider  on  your  latter  end.  In  hell ! 
1  where  the  beast  and  false  prophet  are,  and  shall  be  tor- 
mented day  and  night  for  ever  and  ever.5  I  entreat  of  you 
to  think — in  hell!  I  know  you  hate  to  hear  the  word. 
It  sounds  too  harsh.  There  is  no  music  in  it.  You  say  it 
grates  upon  the  ear.  But  think,  when  it  grates  upon  the 
soul,  the  conscience,  and  the  ear,  and  not  by  sound  only, 
but  a  dread  reality,  when  there  can  be  no  respite,  no  cessa- 
tion, no  deliverance,  no  hope  !  You  will  then  think, —  yes, 
of  this  warning,  of  a  thousand  others,  perhaps  of  this  hour, 
with  many  more  that  are  lost, —  yes,  worse  than  lost, —  that 
have  been  squandered  in  earthly,  vain,  and  transitory  mirth, 
have  been  abused ;  for  there  have  been  many  hours  the 
Spirit  strove  with  you,  and  you  prayed  to  be  excused. 
There  was  an  hour  when  conscience  spake  ;  but  you  stopped 
your  ears  and  would  not  hear.  There  was  a  time  when 
judgment  and  reason  whispered;  but  you  soon  drowned 
their  cry  by  calling  in  some  aid  against  your  own  soul.  To 
judgment  and  reason  you  have  opposed  to  ill  and  wit:  and 
said  '  in  hell '  was  only  in  the  grave.  In  this  vain  citadel, 
in  this  frail  house  of  sand,  you  will  build  until  the  last  seal 
is  broken,  the  last  trump  will  sound,  the  last  woe  be  pro- 
nounced, and  the  last  vial  be  poured  upon  the  earth.  Then, 
impenitent  man  or  woman,  you  will  awake  in  everlasting 
woe  ! 

"  Be  warned;  repent;  fly,  fly  for  succor  to  the  ark  of 
God,  to  Jesus  Christ,  the  Lamb  that  once  was  slain,  that 
you  might  live ;  for  he  is  worthy  to  receive  all  honor,  power, 
and  glory.  Believe,  and  you  shall  live.  Obey  his  word, 
his  Spirit,  his  calls,  his  invitations;  there  is  no  time  for 
delay ;  put  it  not  off,  I  beg  of  you, —  no,  not  for  a  moment. 
Do  you  want  to  join  that  heavenly  choir,  and  sing  the  new 
song?  Then  come  in  God's  appointed  way;  repent.  Do 
you  want  a  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the 
heavens  ?  Then  join  in  heart  and  soul  this  happy  people, 
whose  God  is  the  Lord.  Do  you  want  an  interest  in  the 
New  Jerusalem,  the  beloved  city?  Then  set  your  face  as  a 
flint  Zionward;  become  a  pilgrim  in  the  good  old  way. 
c  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  heaven,5  says  Christ,  '  and  then 
all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you.5  " 


SPECIMENS   OF  HIS   PREACHING.  217 

At  other  times  his  discourse  was  of  the  most  mild  and 
gentle  kind.  Thus,  in  speaking  of  the  Church  of  Christ 
under  various  circumstances,  he  says : 

' '  In  tracing  her  history  from  the  patriarch  Abraham  to 
the  present  day,  we  find  her  variable  as  the  wind,  and 
changeable  as  the  weather. 

"  To-day,  she  is  coming  up  out  of  the  wilderness  leaning 
on  the  arm  of  her  Beloved ;  to-morrow,  '  like  a  young  roe 
leaping  upon  the  mountains,  and  skipping  upon  the  hills.' 

"  Now  she  is  seen  among  the  trees  of  the  woods ;  next  in 
a  palace  of  silver  inclosed  in  boards  of  cedar. 

"  There  we  saw  her  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock;  here  we 
behold  her  in  the  broad  way,  in  the  streets  of  the  great  city. 

"  Again  we  find  her  anions  the  foxes  of  the  desert;  and 
anon  we  perceive  her  seeking  Him  whom  her  soul  loveth. 

"  She  is  asleep  on  her  bed  by  night.;  and  the  same  night 
the  watch  finds  her  in  the  city. 

"  Behold  her  Lord  knocking  at  the  door  for  admittance, 
while  she  is  too  indolent  to  arise  and  let  him  in.  The  next 
moment  she  is  opening  to  her  Beloved,  but  he  had  withdrawn 
himself.  At  one  time  the  voice  of  her  Beloved,  sounding 
over  the  hills  and  echoing  among  the  mountains  like  the 
roar  of  distant  thunder,  has  no  impression ;  next,  the  soft 
whisper  of  love  gains  all  her  attention. 

"Here  blows  the  rough  north  wind  and  strong  south 
wind  upon  her  spices,  yet  they  put  forth  no  fragrancy. 
And  there  the  lightest  breeze  makes  her  roses  blossom,  and 
all  the  air  is  perfume. 

"  See  her  countenance  to-day  black  as  the  tents  of  Kedar ; 
and  to-morrow  comely  as  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem,  and 
fair  as  the  purple  curtains  of  Solomon.  To-day  she  is  '  a 
garden  barred,  a  spring  shut  up,  a  fountain  sealed ;  '  to- 
morrow, '  a  garden  open,  a  well  of  living  waters,  and  streams 
from  Lebanon.'  Now  she  is  weak  as  a  babe ;  a  single 
watchman  can  l  smite,  wound,  and  take  away  her  veil ;  ' 
and  then  she  is  courageous  and  valiant,  •  terrible  as  an  army 
with  banners.'  To-day  she  is  made  to  keep  another's  vine- 
yard ;  to-morrow  she  is  realizing  a  thousand  pieces  of  silver 
from  her  own.  She  is  truly  a  changeable  being,  carried 
about  by  the  slightest  circumstances." 


218  LIIE    Or    WILLIAM    MILLER. 

The  following  extract  from  a  discourse,  is  another  specimen 

of  this  mode  of  address  : 

"  '  Come,  and  let  us  return  unto  the  Lord;  for  he  hath  torn,  and  he 
will  heal  us ;  he  hath  smitten,  and  he  will  bind  us  up.  After  two  days 
will  he  revive  us;  in  the  third  day  he  will  raise  us  up,  and  we  shall  live 
in  his  sight.  Then  shall  we  know,  if  we  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord;  his 
going  forth  is  prepared  as  the  morning;  and  he  shall  come  unto  us  as  the 
rain,  as  the  latter  and  former  rain  unto  the  earth.5  —  Hosea  6  :  1 — 3. 

•'■'  The  text  to  which  I  have  directed  jour  attention,  in  the 
above  paragraph,  is  one  of  the  richest  and  most  interesting 
prophecies  that  was  ever  delivered  to  mortals  by  any  prophet 
since  the  world  began.  Every  word  speaks,  and  is  full  of 
meaning  :  every  sentence  is  a  volume  of  instruction.  Xo 
wisdom  of  man  could  communicate  as  much  in  as  few  words. 
It  is  a  pearl  of  great  price,  lying  deep  in  the  waters  of 
prophecy :  it  is  a  diamond,  which  will  cut  the  film  that 
covers  the  visual  organ  of  the  readers  of  God's  word  :  it  is 
a  gem  in  the  mountain  of  God's  house.  shining  in  the  dark- 
ness.  and  the  darkness  comprehendeth  it  not.  It  puzzled 
the  Pharisee,  confounded  the  Scribe,  and  perplexed  the 
Sadducee.  It  has.  and  will  continue  to  have,  the  same 
influence  on  similar  characters  until  the  end  of  time.  The 
great  men  of  the  earth  will  not  stoop  to  its  light,  because  it 
lies  too  low.  The  small  men  of  the  earth  will  not  pick  it 
up.  for  fear  of  ridicule  from  those  above  them.  And  now, 
dear  reader.  I  am  afraid  you  will  go  and  do  likewise. —  either 
treat  it  with  contempt  or  ridicule.  But  you  will  find,  if  you 
will  examine,  that  in  it  is  contained. — 

"  I.  Our  I'Tty  to  God. 

•'  •  Come,  let  us  return  unto  the  Lord  :  '  and.  If  ire 
follow  on  to  know  the  Lord.'  Here  is  the  whole  duty  of 
man.  as  clearly  described  as  any  crystal  could  make  it. 
Repent,  believe,  and  obey,  are  clearly  inculcated.  What 
better  words  could  an  orator  make  use  of,  to  excite  the  minds 
of  men  to  noble  deeds  of  daring,  than  are  here  used  by  the 
prophet?  •  Come' — he  invites — 'let  us: — he  will  go 
with  them  —  ;  return.'  Ah  !  what  a  word  —  return  ! 
Traveller,  have  you  ever  wandered  far  from  home,  in  a 
cold,  unfeeling  world,  among  strangers,  among  robbers, 
enemies,  thieves,  and  hard-hearted  worldlings  ]  Have  you 
been  sick  and  weak,  wounded  and  torn,  spoiled  and  robbed, 
smitten  and  cheated,  hated  and  reviled,  and  this,  too,  for 


SPECIMENS  OF  HIS  PREACHING.         219 

days,  months,  or  years  ?  Have  you  at  last  '  returned '  to 
your  family,  your  friends,  your  native  land  ?  Do  you  re- 
member those  familiar  objects,  as  you  returned  —  the  way, 
the  mountain,  the  hill,  the  valley,  and  the  plain ;  the  grove, 
the  turn,  the  house,  and  the  brook  ?  Do  you  remember  the 
tree,  the  rock,  the  barberry-bush,  the  gate  and  the  post, 
the  doorway  and  latch  ?  {  0,  yes,'  say  you  ;  '  I  remember, 
too,  my  beating  and  palpitating  heart,  and  the  falling  tear 
which  I  stopped  to  wipe  away  from  my  blanched  cheek,  while 
my  hand  wTas  on  the  latch.  I  remember  how  I  listened  to 
hear  the  loved  ones  breathe,  although  it  was  then  in  the  dark 
watches  of  the  night.' 

"  Thus  tells  the  wanderer  the  tale  of  his  '  return  f  and 
in  like  manner  could  all  the  wandering  sons  of  Zion  speak 
of  their  '  return?  You,  then,  who  have  experienced  these 
things,  can  realize  the  value  of  the  word  l  return?  And 
from  my  soul  I  pity  the  wanderer  that  never  has  returned 
1  unto  the  Lord  f  to  him  that  loved  us,  to  him  who  died  for 
us ;  more,  vastly  more,  than  mortal  friends  could  .ever  do  — 
he  died.  And  so,  say  you,  can  fathers  die  for  children,  and 
mothers  for  their  sons  ;  children  can  give  their  lives,  though 
rare  the  gift,  to  save  the  life  of  parents  :  husbands,  and 
wives,  and  friends  have  fallen,  to  save  each  other  from  death. 
All  this  is  true.  But  here  is  love  greater  than  these  ;  '  for 
while  we  were  enemies  Christ  died  for  us.;  Yea,  more  :  he 
left  his  Father's  presence,  his  glory,  and  that  heaven  where 
angels  dwell ;  where  he,  the  brightest  star  in  all  the  upper 
world,  stood  highest ;  where  seraphim  and  cherubim  in  glory 
cast  down  their  crowns,  and  worshipped  at  his  feet.  '  He 
became  poor,  that  we  through  his  poverty  might  be  made 
rich.'  Again  :  he  bore  our  shame,  and  by  his  stripes  we 
are  healed.  He  was  buffeted  for  our  offences,  and  despised 
by  mortals,  for  whom  he  suffered  in  the  flesh.  He  rose  from 
death  for  our  justification,  and  ascended  on  high,  to  intercede 
for  sinners,  and  has  sent  down  his  Spirit  to  bring  us  wan- 
derers home. 

u  {  For  he  hath  torn?  True,  he  suffers  our  sins  to  tear 
us,  and  those  earthly  powers,  in  whom  we  trust,  to  break  our 
proud  hearts,  and,  therefore,  tears  away  our  vain  supports. 
He  tears  our  affections  from  earthly  things,  that  he  may 
place  them  on  a  more  enduring  substance.     He  tears  our 


220  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

hearts  from  idol  gods,  that  he  may  place  them  on  God  su- 
preme. He  tears  our  soul  from  the  body,  that  we  may  no 
longer  live  in  the  flesh  to  sin,  but  depart  in  the  spirit,  and 
be  with  Christ. 

"  ,%  And  he  loill  heal  us?  Yes,  he  will  heal  us  from  all 
our  backslidings,  and  love  us  freely  for  his  own  name's  sake. 
He  will  heal  us  from  sin,  by  showing  us  its  deadly  nature. 
He  will  heal  us  from  worldly  affections,  by  placing  our 
affections  in  heaven.  He  will  heal  our  hearts  of  idolatry, 
by  the  taking  possession  of  them  himself.  He  will  heal  us 
from  death,  by  the  resurrection  from  the  grave. 

"  i  He  hath  smitten?  God  has  so  ordered,  in  his  provi- 
dence, that  his  children  cannot  have  intercourse  and  associa- 
tion with  men  of  the  world,  and  with  the  kingdoms  of  this 
earth,  but  that  persecution,  or  loss  of  Christian  character,  is 
sure  to  follow.  The  prophet  is  showing  the  present  state  of 
the  church,  while  the  tares  and  wheat  are  growing  together. 
The  children  of  God  shall  be  smitten  —  meaning  they  shall 
be  chastised,  persecuted,  ruled  over.  See  the  Roman  power, 
from  the  days  of  their  connection  with  the  Jews  until  the 
present  time,  ruling  over,  persecuting,  and  trampling  under 
foot  the  church  of  God.  Our  text  is  not  only  showing  us 
our  duty  to  God,  but  it  teaches  us  the  sufferings  of  the  church, 
the  dealings  of  God  with  her,  and  her  final  redemption  :  the 
first  and  second  coming  of  her  Lord ;  her  final  deliverance 
from  death  and  all  enemies,  and  her  glorified  reign. 

"  'And  heicill  bind  us  up  : '  which  is  a  promise  of  God, 
that,  although  the  church  should  be  torn  and  smitten,  yet 
he  would  heal  them,  and  bind  them  up.  In  due  time  he 
would  gather  them  into  one  fold ;  he  would  bind  up  all  their 
wounds,  and  heal  them  of  all  their  maladies.  He  would 
visit  their  transgressions  with  a  rod,  and  their  iniquities  with 
stripes :  but  his  loving  kindness  he  would  not  take  from 
them." 


An  extract  from  his  lecture  on  the  parable  of  the  "  ten 
virgins,"  will  close  these  specimens.  He  thus  gives  his 
understanding  of  what  is  denoted  by  their  "  trimming  " 
their  lamps. 

"  The  world,  for  a  number  of  years,  have  been  trimming 
their  lamps,  and  the  wise  and  foolish  have  been  engaged  in 
translating  the  word  of  God  into  almost  every  language 


SPECIMENS   OF   HIS   PREACHING.  221 

known  to  us  upon  the  earth.  Mr.  Judson  tells  us  that  it 
has  been  translated  into  one  hundred  and  fifty  languages 
within  thirty  years ;  that  is,  three  times  the  number  of  all 
the  translations  known  to  us  before.  Then  fourfold  light 
has  been  shed  among  the  nations,  within  the  short  period  of 
the  time  above  specified ;  and  we  are  informed  that  a  part, 
if  not  all,  of  the  word  of  God  is  now  given  to  all  nations  in 
their  own  language.  This,  surely,  is  setting  the  word  of 
life  in  a  conspicuous  situation,  that  it  may  give  light  to  all 
in  the  world.  This  has  not  been  done  by  the  exertions  of 
Christians  or  professors  only,  but  by  the  aid  of  all  classes 
and  societies  of  men.  Kings  have  opened  their  coffers 
and  favored  those  engaged  in  the  work :  nobles  have  used 
their  influence,  and  have  cast  into  the  treasury  of  the  Lord 
of  their  abundance ;  rich  men  have  bestowed  of  their  riches ; 
and,  in  many  cases,  the  miser  has  forgotten  his  parsimony, 
the  poor  have  replenished  the  funds  of  the  Lord's  house,  and 
the  widow  has  cast  in  her  mite.  How  easy  to  work  the 
work  of  the  Lord  when  the  hearts  of  men  are  made  willing 
by  his  power  !  But  shall  we  forget  those  who  have  forsaken 
the  land  of  their  fathers,  the  home  of  their  nativity,  and  have 
spent  lonesome  years  of  toil  among  strangers,  —  yes,  worse 
than  strangers, —  among  heathen  idolaters,  and  the  savages  of 
the  wilderness,  in  the  cold  regions  of  the  north,  and  under  the 
scorching  rays  of  a  vertical  sun,  among  the  suffocating  sands 
of  the  desert,  or  in  the  pestilential  atmosphere  of  India ; 
who  have  risked  their  lives  to  learn  a  language,  and  prepare 
themselves  to  trim  a  lamp  for  those  who  sit  in  darkness  and 
the  shadow  of  death  1  No,  we  will  not  forget  them :  the 
prayers  of  thousands  have  ascended  before  the  golden  altar, 
morning  and  evening,  on  their  behalf,  and  Israel's  God  has 
been  their  protector.  Surely  we  may  hope  that  these  have 
oil  in  their  lamps,  who  have  sacrificed  so  much  to  bestow  a 
lamp  upon  others.  But  remember,  my  brethren,  the  Lord 
he  is  God,  and  let  him  have  all  the  glory.  This  is  the  time, 
and  the  same  time  that  Gabriel  informed  Daniel,  '  Many 
should  run  to  and  fro,  and  knowledge  should  increase.' 
This,  too,  is  the  same  time  when  the  angel  flying  through 
the  midst  of  heaven  had  the  everlasting  gospel  to  preach  to 
them  who  dwelt  upon  the  earth.  Here  are  Christ's  words, 
fulfilled,  where  he  says,  '  And  this  gospel  of  the  kingdom 


222  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

stall  be  preached  in  all  tte  world  for  a  witness  unto  all  na- 
tions ;  and  tten  stall  tte  end  come.' 

'--  2nd.  It  is  plain,  to  any  diligent  observer  of  tte  signs  of 
tte  times,  ttat  all  tte  societies  for  moral  reform  in  our  world 
at  tte  present  day  are  parts  of  the  fulfilment  of  tte  parable, 
giving  more  ligbt.  What  of  our  Bible  societies  1  Are  not 
ttese  trimming  tte  lamp  for  millions  of  tuman  beings  ? 
Ttirty  years  past,  more  ttan  ttree-fourtts  of  tte  families  in 
what  we  call  Ctristian  lands  were  wittout  the  lamp  of  life, 
and  now  nearly  all  are  supplied.  Many  of  those  who  sat  in 
heathenish  darkness  then  are  now  rejoicing  in  the  light  of 
God's  book.  And  much  of  this  has  been  performed  through 
the  instrumentality  of  Bible  societies  ;  and  not  only  through 
the  agency  of  the  church,  but  political  men,  men  of  the  world, 
the  great  men,  merchants  of  the  earth,  and  those  who  trade 
in  ships,  all  who  live  under  the  influence  of  the  gospel, —  the 
£  kingdom  of  heaven,' — have  engaged  in  the  work.  Will  not 
the  most  sceptical  acknowledge  that  this  society  has  succeeded 
beyond  the  most  sanguine  expectation  of  its  most  ardent 
advocates  '?  And  is  not  this  strong  circumstantial  evidence 
that  the  Bridegroom  is  near,  even  at  the  door? 

':  3d.  The  missionary  societies,  of  all  sects  and  denomina- 
tions, which  have  been  established  within  forty  years,  have  as 
far  exceeded  all  former  exertions  of  this  kind  as  the  overflowing 
Nile  does  the  waters  of  the  brook  Kidron.  See  the  mission- 
ary spirit  extending  from  east  to  west,  and  from  north  to 
south,  warming  the  breast  of  the  philanthropist,  giving  life 
and  vigor  to  tte  cold-tearted  moralist,  and  animating  and 
enlivening  tte  social  circle  of  tte  pious  devotee.  Every  na- 
tion, from  India  to  Oregon,  from  Kamtsctatka  to  New  Zea- 
land, has  been  visited  by  ttese  wise  servants  (as  we 
tope)  of  tte  cross,  proclaiming  { tte  acceptable  year  of  tte 
Lord,  and  tte  day  of  vengeance  of  our  God,'  carrying  tte 
lamp,  tte  word  of  God,  in  their  tands,  and  oil,  faitt  in  God, 
in  their  hearts.  All  classes  of  men  are  engaged  in  this 
cause,  from  tte  gray  hairs  of  old  age  clown  to  the  sprightly 
youth  of  ten  years.  Who,  then,  can  doubt  but  that  tte 
virgins,  in  ttis  sense,  have  and  are  trimming  their  lamps,  and 
the  bride  is  making  herself  ready?  •  Go  ye  out  to  meet 
him.' 

"4th.  The  Sabbath-schools  and  Bible-classes  are  but  a  part 


SPECIMENS   OF   HIS   PREACHING.  223 

of  the  fulfilment  of  the  parable,  yet  clearly  an  evidence  that 
the  virgins  are  now  trimming  their  lamps.  This  system  of 
teaching  the  young  and  ignorant  took  its  rise  between  forty 
and  fifty  years  since,  at  the  very  time  that  the  Christian 
world  were  praying,  and  ardently  praying,  for  the  coming 
of  Christ,  before  that  part  of  the  Saviour's  prayer  was  for- 
gotten, '  Thy  kingdom  come.'  From  a  little  fountain  this 
stream  of  water  has  become  a  great  river,  and  encompassed 
the  whole  land.  Every  quarter  of  the  globe  is  drinking 
at  this  fountain  or  stream  of  knowledge,  and  the  youth  are 
taught  to  trim  their  lamps.  And  when  the  Bridegroom  shall 
come  may  we  not  reasonably  hope  that  the  thousands  of  the 
young  men  and  young  women,  who  have  assisted  in  giving  light 
to  others,  may  be  found  having  oil  in  their  vessels,  and  their 
lamps  trimmed  and  burning,  and  they  looking  and  waiting 
for  the  coming  of  their  Master,  that  when  he  comes  they 
may  rise  to  meet  him  in  the  air,  with  ten  thousand  of  their 
pupils,  who  will  sing  the  new  song  in  the  New  Jerusalem 
for  ever  and  ever  1  Search  diligently,  my  young  friends, 
and  see  to  it  that  ye  believe  in  this  word,  '  which  is  able  to 
make  you  wise  unto  salvation.' 

"  5th.  Tract  societies  are  of  much  use,  and  are  an  efficient 
means  to  help  to  trim  the  lamps.  Like  snuffers  that  take 
away  the  preventives  to  the  light,  so  are  tracts.  They  take 
away  from  the  mind  the  prejudice  that  thousands  have 
against  reading  the  word  of  God ;  they  remove  those  rooted 
and  groundless  opinions,  which  many  have,  that  they  cannot 
understand  the  Bible :  they  serve  to  excite  the  mind  to  this 
kind  of  reading ;  they  enlighten  the  understanding  in  some 
scriptural  truths  ;  they  are  pioneers,  in  many  instances,  to 
conversion :  they  can  be  sent  where  the  word  of  God  cannot 
at  first  be  received ;  in  one  word,  they  are  the  harbingers  of 
light,  the  forerunners  of  the  Bible.  And  in  this,  too,  all 
men  in  this  probationary  state  seem  to  be  more  or  less 
engaged,  from  the  king  on  the  throne,  down  to  the  poor  peas- 
ant in  the  cottage,  writing,  printing,  folding,  transporting, 
paying,  or  reading,  those  silent  little  messengers  of  the  vir- 
gins' lamp.  ;  Then  all  those  virgins  arose  and  trimmed  their 
lamps.'  Has  not  God's  hand  been  seen  in  all  this  ?  And 
glory  be  to  him  who  hath  disposed  the  hearts  of  men  to  work 
the  work  that  God  bids  them,  and  to  fulfil  the  blessed 
20 


224  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

•word  which  he  hath  given  them.     This  institution  took  its 
rise  about  the  same  time  with  the  Bible  society. 

"6th.  Temperance  societies.  These  serve  one  purpose 
in  trimming  the  lamps  and  preparing  the  way  for  the  virgins 
to  go  out  and  meet  the  Bridegroom.  Our  world,  twenty 
years  ago,  might  be  called  a  world  of  fashionable  drunkards  ; 
almost  all  men  drank  of  the  intoxicating  bowl,  and  thought 
it  no  harm.  But  when  the  lamp  began  to  dart  its  rays 
around  our  tabernacles,  it  was  found  by  woful  experience 
that  those  who  drank  of  the  poisonous  cup  were  totally  and 
wholly  unprepared  to  receive  the  warning  voice,  or  to  hear 
the  midnight  cry,  l  Behold,  the  Bridegroom  cometh  ! '  No, 
'they  that  were  drunken  were  drunken  in  the  night,'  says 
the  apostle.  l  Therefore  let  us  watch  and  be  sober.'  And 
Peter  tells  us,  '  But  the  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand ;  be  ye 
therefore  sober,  and  watch  unto  prayer.'  How  foolish  would 
it  have  been  for  a  drunken  man  to  be  set  on  a  watch,  or  a  pray- 
ing man  to  be  found  drunk  !  Therefore,  in  order  that  men 
might  be  in  a  suitable  frame  of  mind  to  receive  instruction  at 
the  close  of  this  dispensation,  and  be  in  a  situation  to  listen  to 
the  midnight  cry,  God  ordered  the  virgins,  and  they  arose 
and  trimmed  their  lamps  :  and  in  all  human  probability 
thousands,  who  would  have  met  a  drunkard's  grave  if  this 
society  had  not  arose,  are  now  watching,  with  their  lamps 
trimmed  and  burning,  ready  to  meet  the  Bridegroom  at  his 
coming.  Perhaps  this  temperance  society  is  the  virgins'  last 
resort.  The  Judge  stands  at  the  door ;  go  ye  out  to  meet 
him.  This  society,  like  the  others  before  mentioned,  is  a 
general  thing,  and  all  sects,  denominations,  and  classes  of 
men,  are  engaged  in  it,  and  it  has  an  important  influence  upon 
all  men  who  are  in  this  probationary  state,  and  who  may  be 
termed,  as  in  our  text.  '  virgins.'  This  society  is  of  later 
origin  than  the  others,  and  seems  to  be  a  rear-guard  to  wake 
up  a  few  stragglers  which  the  other  societies  could  not  reach. 
And  now,  drunkards,  is  your  time  ;  Wisdom  stands  at  the 
door  and  knocks  ;  let  go  the  intoxicating  bowl ;  be  sober,  and 
hear  the  midnight  cry,  '  Behold,  the  Bridegroom  cometh  !  ' 
For  your  souls'  sake  drink  not  another  draught,  lest  he  come 
and  find  you  drunken,  •  and  that  day  come  upon  you  una- 
wares and  find  you  sleeping.'  0,  be  wise,  ye  intemperate  men ! 
for  they  only  went  into  the  marriage  who  were  found  ready, 


SPECIMENS   OF   HIS   PREACHING.  225 

c  and  the  door  was  shut.'  'Then  came  also  the  other  virgins, 
saying,  Lord,  Lord,  open  to  us.  But  he  answered  and  said, 
Verily,  I  say  unto  you,  I  know  you  not.  Watch,  therefore, 
for  ye  neither  know  the  day  nor  the  hour  when  the  Son  of 
Man  cometh.'  '  But  the  wise  shall  understand,'  says  Daniel, 
12:  10. 

''And  now,  my  Christian  friends,  let  me  inquire,  Are 
your  lamps  trimmed  and  burning?  And  have  you  oil  in 
your  vessels?  Are  you  prepared  for  the  coming  Bride- 
groom ?  And  are  you  awake  to  this  important  subject  ? 
"What  say  you  ?  If  this  parable,  to  which  I  have  directed 
your  minds,  has  reference  to  the  last  day  and  the  coming  of 
Christ ;  if  the  *  virgins  '  have  reference  to  all  men  in  the  pro- 
bationary state,  and  dividing  them  into  two  classes,  wise  and 
foolish ;  if  the  l  lamp '  is  the  word  of  God,  and  J  oil '  means 
faith  in  his  word,  or  grace  in  the  heart,  as  some  say, —  then 
my  conclusions  are  just,  and  the  evidence  is  strong  that  we 
live  at  the  end  of  the  gospel  kingdom,  and  upon  the  threshold 
of  the  glorified  state  of  the  righteous.  Then  examine  your 
Bibles,  and  if  you  can  more  fairly  prove  any  other  exposition 
of  this  parable  than  I  have  this,  then  believe  yours,  and 
time  must  settle  the  issue ;  but  if  you  can  find  nothing  in 
the  Scriptures  to  controvert  plainly  my  explanation,  then 
believe,  and  prepare  to  meet  the  Bridegroom  :  for,  behold,  he 
cometh  !  Awake,  ye  fathers  and  mothers  in  Zion  !  ye  have 
long  looked  and  prayed  for  this  day.  Behold  the  signs  ! 
He  is  near,  even  at  the  door.  And,  ye  children  of  God,  lift 
up  your  heads  and  rejoice,  for  your  redemption  draweth  nigh. 
For  these  things  have  begun  to  come  to  pass.  And,  ye 
little  lambs  of  the  flock,  remember,  Jesus  has  promised  to 
carry  you  in  his  arms,  and  that  he  will  come  and  take  you 
to  himself,  that  where  he  is  there  ye  may  be  also.  But  re- 
member, all  of  you,  the  wrise  had  oil  in  their  lamps,  and  they 
were  trimmed  and  burning.  Search  deep :  examine  your- 
selves closely ;  be  not  deceived  ;  and  may  the  Spirit,  which 
searcheth  all  things,  and  knoweth  what  is  in  the  mind  of 
man,  assist  you. 

'•  But,  my  impenitent  friends,  what  shall  I  say  to  you? 
Shall  I  say,  as  the  Master  in  the  parable,  •  Behold,  the 
Bridegroom  cometh  :  go  ye  out  to  meet  him  '  ?  Prepare  to 
meet  your  Judge.     Now  he  has  given  you  a  time  for  repent- 


226  LIFE    OP   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

ance :  you  have  a  probationary  season,  and  possibly  now  the 
sceptre  of  mercy  is  held  out  to  you.  Repent,  or  it  will  soon 
be  said  to  vou.  as  Jeremiah  said  to  the  virgin,  the  daughter 
of  Egypt.  '  In  vain  shalt  thou  use  many  medicines :  for  thou 
shalt  not  be  cured  :  ''  or.  as  in  the  parable.  ;  I  know  you  not.' 
Have  you  no  oil  in  your  lamps  ?  Delay  not  a  moment ; 
believe  the  gospel,  and  you  will  live :  believe  the  word  of 
God :  receive  the  love  of  the  Bridegroom,  and  make  no 
delay :  for  while  they  went  to  buy.  the  Bridegroom  came : 
and  they  that  were  ready  went  in  with  him  to  the  marriage, 
and  the  door  was  shut.  0.  think  what  must  be  the  exercise 
of  your  minds  when  these  things  shall  be  real :  when  you 
will  stand  without  and  knock,  saying.  •  Lord.  Lord,  open  to 
us  !  ;  Again  I  ask.  will  you  repent,  believe,  and  be  saved  i 
Are  you  determined  to  resist  the  truth  until  it  is  too  late  ? 
Say.  sinner,  what  think  ye  ? 

*'-  -  "We  will  risk  the  consequence.  We  do  not  believe  in 
your  day  you  tell  us  of.  The  world  is  the  same  it  always 
was.  —  no  change,  nor  ever  will  be:  but  if  it  should  come, 
it  will  not  this  ten  thousand  years. —  not  in  our  day.  cer- 
tainly. You  do  not  believe  yourself.  If  you  did.  we  should 
call  you  a  fool.'" 

"  Are  these  your  arguments,  sinner  ? 

•'•  •'  Yes.' 

-'•'Well,  if  I  had  brought  no  more,  no  stronger  arguments 
than  these.  I  would  not  blame  you  for  not  believing,  for  not 
one  of  yours  can  you  or  have  you  supported  with  a  particle 
of  proof.  They  are  mere  assertions :  your  believing  or  not 
believing  will  not  alter  the  designs  of  God.  The  antedilu- 
vians believed  not.  The  citizens  of  the  plain  laughed  at  the 
folly  of  Lot.  And  where  are  they  now  ?  Suffering  the 
vengeance  of  eternal  fire. 


SICKNESS.  227 


CHAPTER    XVI. 

HIS    SICKNESS VISIT    TO     MASSACHUSETTS FANATICISM MR. 

MILLER    REPUDIATES    IT. 

At  the  close  of  his  lectures  in  Philadelphia,  Mr.  Miller 
went  to  Trenton,  N.  J.,  to  spend  the  Sabbath  (February  12, 
1843).  By  invitation  of  the  mayor  of  that  city,  he  lectured 
there  three  days,  and  was  listened  to  by  crowded  houses. 

From  Trenton  he  returned  to  New  York  city,  but  held 
no  public  meeting  there.  He  improved  the  opportunity  to 
visit  a  brother  at  Williamsburg,  Long  Island,  where  he  had 
an  interview  with  the  editor  of  the  "Gazette  and  Ad- 
vertiser,*' who  thus  referred  to  it : 

"  Our  curiosity  was  recently  gratified  by  an  introduction 
to  this  gentleman,  who  has  probably  been  an  object  of  more 
abuse,  ridicule  and  blackguardism,  than  any  other  man  now 
living.  A  large  number  of  the  veracious  editors  of  the  politi- 
cal and  religious  newspapers  have  assured  us  that  Mr.  Miller 
was  totally  insane,  and  sundry  preachers  had  confirmed  this 
assurance.  We  were  somewhat  surprised  to  hear  him  con- 
verse on  religious  subjects  with  a  coolness  and  soundness  of 
judgment  which  made  us  whisper  to  ourselves, 

c  If  this  be  madness,  then  there  is  method  in  't.5 

"  When  our  interview  closed,  we  were  left  wondering  at 
the  cause  of  that  malignant  spirit  of  slander  and  falsehood 
with  which  a  man  has  been  assailed,  who  has  spent  his  time 
and  substance  in  a  course  of'  unceasing  toils  to  persuade 
men  •  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come.' 57 

From  New  York,  Mr.  M.  went  up  the  Hudson  river  as 
far  as  Lansingburg,  N.  Y.,  where  he  lectured  from  the  17th 
to  the  21st  of  February.  The  day  following,  in  compliance 
with  the  urgent  request  of  the  Baptist  church  in  Half  Moon, 
N.  Y.,  he  visited  that  place,  and  commenced  a  course  of 
lectures,  which  continued  till  the  5th  of  March. 

At  the  request  of  Mr.  Davis,  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian 
church  in  Ballston  Centre,  Mr.  M.  next  lectured  in  his 
house  from  the  6th  to  the  11th  of  March;  and,  on  the  12th, 
20* 


228  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

gave  two  discourses  at  the  Spa.     As  usual,  a  large  number 
were  present,  and  God's  blessing  was  manifested. 

On  the  loth  of  March,  he  delivered  two  discourses  at 
Rock  City,  in  the  town  of  Milton,  N.  Y.,  about  six  miles 
from  Saratoga  Springs.  He  had  attempted  to  go  as  far  as 
Albany,  to  fulfil  an  engagement  there;  but,  after  getting 
within  fourteen  miles  of  that  city,  he  was  obliged  to  return 
to  Rock  City,  where  he  was  taken  sick  with  his  old  com- 
plaint, erysipelas,  in  his  right  arm.  He  remained  at  the 
house  of  Dea.  Dubois,  where  he  received  the  kindest  atten- 
tion, till  the  23d  of  March.  On  that  day  he  was  removed 
to  the  house  of  Herman  Thomas,  in  the  same  place.  He 
was  carefully  provided  for  there  till  the  80th.  when  he  was 
so  far  convalescent  as  to  be  removed  by  his  son.  By  short 
and  easy  journeys  he  reached  his  home  at  Low  Hampton  on 
the  81st,  as  comfortably  as  could  have  been  hoped  for. 

On  the  6th  of  April  he  commenced  a  letter  to  Mr.  Himes. 
in  which  he  says  :  i;Iam  now  at  home  :  was  brought  home 
six  days  since.  I  am  very  weak  in  body,  but,  blessed  be 
God  !  my  mind,  faith,  and  hope,  are  yet  strong  in  the  Lord, 
— no  wavering  in  my  belief  that  I  shall  see  Christ  this 
year,"  etc.  This  letter  not  being  completed  on  the  13th  of 
April,  his  son  forwarded  it  to  Mr.  Himes,  adding,  "  father 
is  quite  low  and  feeble,  and  we  fear  he  may  be  no  better." 

His  complaint  manifested  itself  in  a  multiplicity  and  suc- 
cession of  carbuncle  boils,  which  were  a  great  drain  on  his 
system,  and  wasted  his  strength  rapidly.  On  the  3d  of 
May,  when  their  violence  had  greatly  abated,  he  wrote  : 
"  My  health  is  on  the  gain,  as  my  folks  would  say.  I  have 
now  only  twenty-two  boils,  from  the  bigness  of  a  grape  to  a 
walnut,  on  my  shoulder,  side,  back,  and  arms.  I  am  truly 
afflicted,  like  Job,  and  have  about  as  many  comforters,  only 
they  do  not  come  to  see  me,  as  Job's  did.'*  Two  weeks 
later,  he  was  again  much  more  feeble,  and  his  physicians 
prohibited  visitors  from  seeing  him. 

On  the  28th  of  May,  his  son  wrote:  "  Father's  health  is 
no  better,  on  the  whole.  He  continues  very  weak  and  low, 
confined  to  his  bed  most  of  the  time/"  In  addition  to  his 
numerous  boils,  he  had,  by  a  fever,  been  brought  near  to 
death's  door. 

About  the  1st  of  July  he  was  so  far  recovered  as  to  be 


FANATICISM  REPUDIATED.  229 

able  to  walk  about  his  house,  and  his  health  continued  to 
improve,  so  that,  from  the  6th  to  the  9th  of  September,  he 
gave  a  course  of  lectures  in  N.  Springfield,  Vt.  He  lectured 
in  Claremont,  N.  H.,  on  the  11th;  in  Springfield,  N.  H., 
on  the  12th;  in  Wilmot,  N.  H.,  on  the  14th;  in  Andover, 
N.  EL  on  the  17th;  in  Franklin,  N.  H.,  on  the  18th;  in 
Guilford,  N.  H.,  from  the  21st  to  the  24th;  in  Gilmanton, 
N.  H.,  on  the  25th ;  and  at  Concord,  N.  H.,  on  the  26th 
and  27th.  On  the  2d  of  October  he  gave  two  addresses  at 
the  camp-meeting  in  Exeter,  N.  H.,  and  arrived  at  LowTell, 
Mass.,  on  the  3d.  He  went  to  Boston  on  the  6th,  gave 
three  discourses,  and  then  returned  home  to  Low  Hampton, 
where  he  remained  till  the  9th  of  November. 

During  this  tour,  Mr.  Miller  was  much  pained  by  wit- 
nessing a  tendency  to  fanaticism  on  the  part  of  some  who 
held  to  his  views.  As  he  had  no  sympathy  for  anything 
of  the  kind,  and  has  been  unjustly  identified  with  it  in  the 
minds  of  the  public,  it  becomes  necessary  to  show  its  origin, 
that  its  responsibility  may  rest  where  it  rightly  belongs. 

The  views  of  Mr.  Miller  being  embraced  by  persons 
belonging  to  various  religious  denominations,  it  was  im- 
possible, from  the  nature  of  the  case,  for  those  of  any  par- 
ticular faith  to  teach  their  own  private  opinions  in  connec- 
tion with  the  Advent,  without  exciting  the  jealousy  of  those 
who  held  opposite  sentiments.  To  avoid  any  such  clashing 
of  opinions,  the  following  platform  was  adopted  by  the  first 
conference  held  by  believers  in  the  Advent  (October  14, 
1840),  in  their  Address  unanimously  presented  to  the 
public,  namely : 

"  Our  object  in  assembling  at  this  time,  our  object  in 
addressing  you,  and  our  object  in  other  efforts,  separate  and 
combined,  on  the  subject  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  at  hand, 
is  to  revive  and  restore  this  ancient  faith,  to  renew  the 
ancient  landmarks,  to  '  stand  in  the  way,  and  see  and  ask 
for  the  old  paths,  where  is  the  good  way ?  in  which  our 
fathers  walked,  and  the  martyrs  i  found  rest  to  their  souls.' 
"We  have  no  purpose  to  distract  the  churches  with  any  new 
inventions,  or  to  get  ourselves  a  name  by  starting  another 
sect  among  the  followers  of  the  Lamb.  We  neither  con- 
demn nor  rudely  assail  others  of  a  faith  different  from  our 
own,  nor  dictate  in  matters  of  conscience  for  our  brethren, 


230  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

nor  seek  to  demolish  their  organizations,  nor  build  new  ones 
of  our  own;  but  simply  to  express  our  convictions,  like 
Christians,  with  the  reasons  for  entertaining  them,  which 
have  persuaded  us  to  understand  the  word  and  promises,  the 
prophecies  and  the  gospel  of  our  Lord,  as  the  first  Chris- 
tians, the  primitive  ages  of  the  church,  and  the  profoundly 
learned  and  intelligent  reformers,  have  unanimously  done, 
in  the  faith  and  hope  that  the  Lord  will  come  quickly  in  his 
glory,  to  fulfil  all  his  promises  in  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead. 

"  We  are  agreed  and  harmonize  with  the  published  creed 
of  the  Episcopal,  Dutch  Reformed,  Presbyterian,  and  Meth- 
odist churches,  together  with  the  Cambridge  Platform 
of  the  Congregational  church,  and  the  Lutheran  and  the 
Roman  Catholic  churches,  in  maintaining  that  Christ's  second 
and  only  coming  now  will  be  to  judge  the  world  at  the  last 
day. 

"We  are  not  of  those  who  sow  discord  among  brethren, 
who  withdraw  from  the  fellowship  of  the  churches,  who  rail 
at  the  office  of  the  ministry,  and  triumph  in  the  exposure  of 
the  errors  of  a  secular  and  apostate  church,  and  who  count 
themselves  holier  than  others,  or  wiser  than  their  fellows. 
The  gracious  Lord  has  opened  to  us  wondrous  things  in  his 
word,  whereof  we  are  glad,  and  in  view  of  which  we  rejoice 
with  fear  and  trembling.  We  reverently  bless  his  name, 
and  we  offer  these  things,  with  the  right  hand  of  our  Chris- 
tian  fellowship  and  union,  to  all  disciples  of  our  common 
Lord,  of  every  sect  and  denomination,  praying  them,  by  the 
love  of  the  crucified  Jesus,  to  regard  the  promise  of  his 
coming,  and  to  cultivate  the  love  of  his  appearing,  and  to 
sanctify  themselves  in  view  of  his  approaching  with  power 
and  great  glory;  although  they  conscientiously  differ  from 
us  in  minor  points  of  faith,  or  reject  some  of  the  peculiarities 
which  exist  in  individuals  of  this  Conference. 

"  We  do  not  seek  to  excite  the  prejudices  of  our  fellow- 
men,  or  to  join  wTith  those  who  mock  at  sin,  or  who  scoff  at 
the  word  or  promise  of  the  great  Jehovah,  or  who  lightly 
esteem  offices  and  ordinances  of  the  church,  or  who  empty 
of  their  power  the  threatenings  of  the  holy  law,  or  who 
count  the  blood  of  the  atonement  a  useless  thing,  or  who 
refuse  to  worship  and  honor  the  Son  of  God  even  as  they 


FANATICISM.  231 

honor  the  Father ;  nor  do  we  refuse  any  of  these,  or  others 
of  divers  faith,  whether  Roman  or  Protestant,  who  receive 
and  heartily  embrace  the  doctrine  of  the  Lord's  coming  in 
his  kingdom ;  for  experience  and  reason  unite  to  teach,  in 
the  words  of  the  apostle,  that  l  every  man's  work  shall  be 
made  manifest,  for  the  day  shall  declare  it: '  and  the  vivid 
apprehension  of  its  approach  tries  and  consumes  the  wood, 
and  hay,  and  stubble,  among  our  opinions,  and  we  all 
become,  by  gentle  necessity,  the  lambs  of  one  flock,  and  are 
led  into  one  fold,  under  the  hand  of  the  Chief  Shepherd  and 
Bishop  of  souls."' 

It  was  thus  unanimously  agreed,  that  the  sectarian  ques- 
tions which  divide  Christians  should  be  avoided  in  the  pre- 
sentation of  the  Advent  doctrine,  and  that  "  minor  points  of 
faith,"  and  the  "  peculiarities  "  in  the  belief  of  any,  should 
not  be  made  prominent,  to  impede  their,  united  labors. 

In  the  autumn  of  1842,  Mr.  Miller's  views  were  embraced 
by  John  Starkweather,  a  graduate  of  the  Andover  Theo- 
logical Seminary,  and  a  minister  of  good  standing  in  the 
Orthodox  Congregational  denomination.  He  had  been  a 
minister  at  the  Marlboro'  Chapel,  in  Boston,  and  at  other 
places,  and  was  regarded  as  a  man  of  peculiar  sanctity.  He 
was,  at  that  time,  unemployed  by  any  people,  and  Elder 
Himes  being  obliged  to  spend  much  of  his  time  in  preaching 
in  other  places  than  Boston,  Mr.  Starkweather  was  called  as 
an  assistant  pastor  of  his  church,  at  the  chapel  in  Chardon- 
street. 

Mr.  Starkweather  commenced  his  labors  there  in  October, 
1842.  He  was  tall,  well  formed,  and  had  a  voice  of  great 
power  and  not  unpleasant  tones.  His  personal  appearance 
was  thus  prepossessing,  which,  with  his  reputation  for 
superior  sanctity,  enabled  him  easily  to  secure  the  confidence 
of  his  hearers,  who  nightly  thronged  the  chapel. 

His  principal  theme  was  the  necessity  of  a  preparation  for 
the  Saviour's  coming.  At  such  a  time  no  subject  seem- 
ingly could  be  more  appropriate.  But  Mr.  Starkweather 
had  embraced  peculiar  views  respecting  personal  sanctifica- 
tion ;  and,  contrary  to  the  understanding  which  had  been 
had  on  the  subject  of  sectarian  views,  he  made  his  own 
notions  not  only  a  test  of  readiness  for  the  Lord's  coming, 
but  of  Christian  fellowship, —  demanding  the  largest  liberty 


232  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM  MILLER. 

for  himself,  and  granting  none  to  others.  He  taught  that 
conversion,  however  full  and  thorough,  did  not  fit  one  for 
God's  favor  without  a  second  wTork;  and  that  this  second 
work  was  usually  indicated  by  some  bodily  sensation. 

During  the  winter,  the  losing  of  strength  and  other  cata- 
leptic and  epileptic  phenomena  became  manifested,  and 
were  hailed  by  him  as  evidences  of  the  great  power  of  God 
in  the  sanctification  of  those  who  were  already  devoted 
Christians.     He  denominated  such  "  the  sealing  power." 

These  manifestations  were  new  to  a  majority  of  his  hear- 
ers. Some  looked  on  in  wonder  and  awe,  while  others  were 
suspicious  of  the  new  development,  but  feared  to  "  offend 
against  the  Holy  Ghost,"  as  dissent  from  it  was  termed; 
and  those  who  were  favorably  impressed  were  anxious  to  ex- 
perience on  themselves  the  "  sealing  powder." 

Those  who  were  familiar  with  the  history  of  fanaticism  in 
past  ages,  who  had  read  with  pain  the  termination  of  the 
career  of  the  eloquent  Edward  Irving  in  England,  wTho  knew 
the  devastation  caused  by  fanaticism  in  the  time  of  the 
Reformation,  of  its  effects  in  the  early  ages  of  Christianity, 
and  of  the  results  produced  by  it  even  in  many  portions  of 
our  own  country  during  the  infancy  of  some  of  the  sects 
among  us,  were  at  no  loss  respecting  its  character. 

It  was  at  first  supposed  that  Mr.  Starkweather  was  an 
innocent  cause  of  this,  and  that  he  was  ignorant  of  his  strong 
mesmeric  powers,  by  which  he  had  obtained  a  sympathetic 
influence  over  some  of  his  hearers.  He  wTas  reasoned  with 
on  the  subject,  but  to  no  purpose.  His  mind  was  bent  in  a 
certain  direction,  and  pursue  his  course  he  would.  His 
actual  spirit  was  not  discovered  until  leading  brethren  pub- 
licly dissented  from  such  exercises  as  any  necessary  part  of 
Christianity.  At  this  the  uncaged  lion  wTas  aroused,  and  it 
became  evident  what  manner  of  spirit  he  was  of. 

Near  the  close  of  April,  1843,  it  was  deemed  necessary 
to  take  a  decided  stand  on  the  subject.  A  meeting  had 
been  appointed  for  the  afternoon,  and  Mr.  Himes,  who  had 
been  absent  during  these  occurrences,  with  judicious  breth- 
ren determined  to  endeavor  to  stem  the  current  of  fanaticism 
which  had  commenced.  In  a  calm  and  faithful  manner,  he 
gave  them  the  history  of  various  movements  which  had  been 
destroyed  or  greatly  injured  by  fanaticism;  and,  without 


FANATICISM.  233 

intimating  that  evidences  of  such  then  existed,  he  exhorted 
them  to  learn  from  past  experience,  and  see  to  it  that  they 
avoid  the  rocks  on  which  others  had  been  shipwrecked. 

Mr.  Starkweather  arose  in  reply,  and  was  so  vehement 
that  Mr.  Himes  felt  justified  in  again  addressing  the  audi- 
ence, exposing  the  nature  of  the  exercises  that  had  appeared 
among  them,  and  their  pernicious  tendency. 

This  so  shocked  the  sensibilities  of  those  who  regarded 
them  as  the  "  great  power  of  God,"  that  they  cried  out  and 
stopped  their  ears.  Some  jumped  upon  their  feet,  and  some 
ran  out  of  the  house.  ' '  You  will  drive  out  the  Holy 
Ghost !  "  cried  one.  "  You  are  throwing  on  cold  wTater  ! ;J 
said  another. 

"  Throwing  on  cold  water  !  "  said  Mr.  Himes ;  "I  would 
throw  on  the  Atlantic  Ocean  before  I  would  be  identified 
with  such  abominations  as  these,  or  suffer  them  in  this  place 
unrebuked." 

Starkweather  immediately  announced  that  "  the  saints  " 
would  thenceforth  meet  at  another  place  than  the  Chardon- 
street  Chapel ;  and,  retiring,  his  followers  withdrew  with 
him. 

From  this  time  he  was  the  leader  of  a  party,  held  separate 
meetings,  and,  by  extending  his  visits  to  other  places,  he 
gained  a  number  of  adherents.  He  was  not  countenanced 
by  the  friends  of  Mr.  Miller ;  but  the  public  identified  him 
and  his  movement  with  Mr.  Miller  and  his. 

This  was  most  unjust  to  Mr.  Miller ;  but  to  this  day  the 
Romanists  identify,  in  the  same  manner  the  fanaticism  con- 
sequent on  the  Reformation,  with  Luther  and  those  who  re- 
pudiated the  doings  of  Munzer,  Storch  and  others. 

While  Starkweather  was  thus  repudiated,  he  persisted  in 
forcing  himself,  wherever  he  could,  upon  the  public,  as  a 
religious  teacher  and  lecturer  on  the  Advent. 

On  the  9th  of  August,  1843,  a  camp-meeting  commenced 
at  Plainfield,  Ct.,  at  which  Starkweather  was,  and  some 
manifestations  were  exhibited  which  wrere  entirely  new  to 
those  present,  and  for  which  they  could  not  account.  An- 
other meeting  was  held  at  Stepney,  near  Bridgeport,  on  the 
28th  of  the  same  month,  where  the  developments  were  more 
marked.  A  few  young  men,  professing  to  have  the  gift  of 
discerning  spirits,  were  hurried  into  great  extravagances. 


234  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

Elder  J.  Litch  published  a  protest  against  such  exhibitions, 
in  which  he  said  : 

"A  more  disgraceful  scene,  under  the  garb  of  piety.  I 
have  rarely  witnessed.  For  the  last  ten  years  I  have  come 
in  contact  nearly  every  year,  more  or  less,  with  the  same 
spirit,  and  have  marked  its  developments,  its  beginning,  and 
its  result ;  and  am  now  prepared  to  say  that  it  is  evil,  and 
only  evil,  and  that  continually.  I  have  uniformly  opposed 
it  wherever  it  has  made  its  appearance,  and  as  uniformly 
have  been  denounced  as  being  opposed  to  the  power  of  God, 
and  as  resisting  the  operations  of  the  Spirit.  The  origin  of 
it,  is  the  idea  that  the  individuals  thus  exercised  are  entirely 
under  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  are  his  children, 
and  that  he  will  not  deceive  them  and  lead  them  astray  ; 
hence  every  impulse  which  comes  upon  them  is  yielded  to 
as  coming  from  God,  and,  following  it,  there  is  no  length  of 
fanaticism  to  which  they  will  not  go.'3  —  Midnight  Cry, 
Sept.  14,  1843. 

This  fanaticism  was  the  result  of  Starkweather's  teaching 
that  "  gifts  "-  were  to  be  restored  to  the  church.  Even  he 
seemed  at  first  amazed  at  the  results. 

As  a  specimen  of  the  hallucination,  a  young  man  by  the 

name  of  M imagined  that  he  had  power  to  hold  the 

cars  from  moving  on  the  railroad,  by  the  mere  effort  of  his 
will.  As  they  were  about  starting,  he  said  :  "  Don't  you 
go."  The  wheels  of  the  locomotive  made  several  revolu- 
tions before  the  heavy  train  started.  "  Now  go,"  said  he  ; 
and  it  moved.  "There!"  said  he,  "did  I  not  stop  the 
train?" 

Returning  home,  "  Father,"  said  he,  li  do  you  believe  I 
have  the  power  of  God  ]  " 

"  Yes,"  said  the  father,  who  had  been  fascinated  at  the 
meeting. 

"  Well,  then,  drive  the  horse  on  to  that  rock  by  the  road- 
side ;"  and  he  was  obeyed,  somewhat  to  their  discomfort. 

On  the  13th  of  September,  another  meeting  wras  held  at 
Windsor,  Ct.  The  same  spirit  appeared  there,  and  is  de- 
scribed by  Elder  L.  C.  Collins  in  the  "  Signs  of  the  Times," 
September  27,  1843.  One  female,  believing  that,  as  Peter 
walked  on  the  sea  by  faith,  so  she  by  faith  might  walk  across 
the  Connecticut  river,  resolved  to  make  the  attempt,  but 


LETTER   ON  FANATICISM.  235 

was  prevented.     They  kept  the  meeting  in  confusion  an  hour 
or  more,  and  would  listen  to  no  remonstrances. 

During  Mr.  Miller's  confinement  by  his  sickness,  he  had 
not  come  in  contact  with  any  of  these  things  ;  but,  on  his 
last  tour  into  Massachusetts,  he  had  seen  something  of  it, 
and  took  the  earliest  opportunity  to  do  his  duty  respecting 
it,  by  a  prompt  disclaimer.  Before  reaching  home,  he 
stopped  a  day  at  Castleton,  Vt.,  and  wrote  the  following 
letter,  which  was  published  in  the  "  Signs  of  the  Times"  of 
November  8,  1843  : 

"  Dear  Brother  :  — My  heart  was  deeply  pained,  during 
my  tour  east,  to  see  in  some  few  of  my  former  friends  a 
proneness  to  wild  and  foolish  extremes  and  vain  delusions, 
such  as  working  miracles,  discerning  of  spirits,  vague  and 
loose  views  on  sanctification,  &c. 

"  As  it  respects  the  working  of  miracles,  I  have  no  faith 
in  those  who  pretend  beforehand  that  they  can  work  mira- 
cles. See  Bev.  13  :  13,  14  :  i  And  he  doeth  great  won- 
ders, so  that  he  maketh  fire  come  down  from  heaven  on  the 
earth  in  the  sight  of  men.  And  deceiveth  them  that  dwell 
on  the  earth  by  the  means  of  those  miracles  which  he  had 
power  to  do  in  the  sight  of  the  beast.'  Whenever  God  has 
seen  fit  to  work  miracles,  the  instruments  have  seemingly 
been  unconscious  of  having  the  power,  until  the  work  was 
done.  They  have,  in  no  instance  that  I  recollect,  proclaimed 
as  with  a  trumpet  that  they  could  or  would  work  a  miracle. 
Moses  and  the  apostles  were  more  modest  than  these  modern 
pretenders  to  this  power.  You  may  depend  upon  it,  whoso- 
ever claims  the  power  has  the  spirit  of  Antichrist.  Bev. 
16  :  14  :  £  For  they  are  the  spirit  of  devils,  working  mira- 
cles, which  go  forth  to  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  of  the 
whole  world,  to  gather  them  together  to  the  battle  of  that 
great  day  of  God  Almighty.'  I  know  they  pretend  to  prove 
that  men  are  to  have  this  power  unto  the  end  of  the  world, 
by  Mark  16  :  17.  But  take  the  whole  passage  together, 
and  what  does  it  prove  ?  Not  that  all  believers  can  do  these 
miracles,  but  that  these  miracles  would  follow  those  who 
believe  ;  that  is,  those  who  believed  in  the  record  that  God 
had  given  would,  in  the  apostolic  age,  have  a  confirmation 
of  the  truth  of  that  word  by  those  miracles,  which  would 
21 


236  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

follow  them.  The  word  would  be  thus  confirmed  by  mira- 
cles, performed  by  prophets  and  apostles,  who  were  inspired 
to  write  the  Old  and  New  Testament.  I  see  no  reason  for 
the  working  of  miracles  in  this  age  ;  l  for  if  they  believe  not 
Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither  would  they  believe  though 
one  should  arise  from  the  dead.'  Since  the  apostles'  day, 
none  have  worked  miracles  but  the  anti- Christian  beast. 

"  The  discerning  of  spirits  is,  I  fear,  another  fanatical 
movement  to  draw  off  Adventists  from  the  truth,  and  to  lead 
men  to  depend  on  the  feeling,  exercise,  and  conceit  of  their 
own  mind,  more  than  on  the  word  of  God.  It  builds  up  a 
spirit  of  pride  and  self-righteousness,  and  thus  loses  sight 
of  the  humbling  doctrine,  to  account  others  better  than  our- 
selves. If  all  Christians  were  to  possess  this  gift,  how 
should  we  live  by  faith  ]  Each  would  stand  upon  the  spirit- 
ual gifts  of  his  brother,  and,  if  possessed  of  the  true  spirit 
of  God,  could  never  err.  Surely  the  devil  has  great  power 
over  the  minds  of  some  at  the  present  day.  And  how  shall 
we  know  what  manner  of  spirit  they  are  of?  The  Bible 
answers  :  '  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them.'  Then  it  is 
not  by  the  spirit.  I  think  those  who  claim  this  power  will 
soon  manifest,  by  their  fruits,  that  they  have  another  rule 
than  the  Bible.  I  have  observed  that  those  persons,  who 
think  that  they  have  been  baptized  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  as 
they  term  it,  become  more  sensitive  of  themselves,  and  very 
jealous  for  their  own  glory;  less  patient,  and  full  of  the 
denunciatory  spirit  against  others,  who  are  not  so  fortunate 
as  themselves.  There  are  many  spirits  gone  out  into  the 
world  :  and  we  are  commanded  to  try  the  spirits.  The  spirit 
that  does  not  cause  us  to  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly, 
in  this  present  world,  is  not  the  spirit  of  Christ.  I  am  more 
and  more  convinced  that  Satan  has  much  to  do  in  these  wild 
movements.  He  has  come  down,  having  great  wrath, 
knowing  he  hath  but  a  short  time ;  and  he  will,  if  possible, 
deceive  the  very  elect. 

"On  sanctification  I  have  but  little  at  present  to  say. 
Sanctification  has  two  prominent  meanings  in  Scripture :  setting 
apart  for  holy  purposes ;  and  being  cleansed  from  all  sin  and 
pollution.  Every  soul  converted  to  God  is  sanctified  in  the 
first  sense.  He  devotes  himself  to  God,  to  love,  serve,  and 
obey  him  forever.     Every  one  who  obtains  complete  redemp- 


LETTER    ON   FANATICISM.  237 

tion,  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  is  sanctified  in  the  second  sense. 
The  first  kind  is,  or  ought  to  be,  now  enjoyed  by  every  true 
believer  in  Christ.  The  other  will  never  be  accomplished 
till  the  resurrection  of  the  just,  when  these  vile  bodies  shall 
be  changed.  We  are  sanctified,  in  the  first  sense,  through 
faith  and  a  knowledge  of  the  truth ;  and,  in  my  opinion, 
are  not  perfect  until  we  are  perfect  in  faith  and  knowledge 
of  the  word  of  God.  Yet  many  among  us,  wTho  pretend  to 
be  wholly  sanctified,  are  following  the  traditions  of  men, 
and  apparently  are  as  ignorant  of  truth  as  others  who  make 
no  such  pretensions,  and  are  not  half  so  modest.  I  must 
confess  that  they  have  to  me  an  appearance  of  boasting.  I 
would  not  judge  harshly ;  but  I  cannot  see  any  reason  to 
believe  them  any  more  holy  than  many  others,  who  make  no 
such  claims.  I  would  say  nothing  to  prevent  any  man  or 
woman  from  living  holy.  This  is  what  wTe  are  all  seeking 
after,  and  what  I  expect  to  attain,  when  Christ  shall  come 
and  blot  out  my  sins,  according  to  his  promise.  —  Acts  3  : 
19.  I  think  those  with  whom  I  have  conversed,  who  pre- 
tend to  have  obtained  this  grace,  instead  of  enjoying  more 
than  others,  labor,  in  their  arguments,  to  lower  down  the 
standard  of  holiness  to  their  present  capacity.  Instead  of 
looking  for  a  blessed  hope  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ, 
who  shall  change  our  vile  bodies,  and  raise  our  capacity  to 
enjoy  and  adore  him  forever,  in  an  infinitely  higher  state  of 
perfection,  they  think  they  are  actually  enjoying  all  the 
promises  now,  and  are  not  in  need  of  any  further  work  of 
grace  to  give  them  a  right  to  the  eternal  inheritance  of  the 
saints.  If  this  be  so,  and  we  are  truly  perfect,  sanctified, 
and  prepared  for  our  possession  in  heaven,  then  every  mo- 
ment we  are  debarred  our  right  of  entering  and  taking  pos- 
session of  our  inheritance  would  be  an  illegal  withholding 
of  us  from  our  just  rights  of  participating  in  the  enjoyment 
of  the  will  of  our  blessed  Master.  But  it  is  not  so.  We 
are  minors,  and  subjects  of  chastisements.  Prov.  3  :  11, 
12  :  '  My  son,  despise  not  the  chastening  of  the  Lord, 
neither  be  weary  of  his  correction ;  for  whom  the  Lord 
loveth  he  correcteth ;  even  as  a  father  the  son  in  whom  he 
delighteth.'  Heb.  12  :  5 — 9  :  i  And  ye  have  forgotten  the 
exhortation  which  speaketh  unto  you  as  unto  children,  My 
son,  despise  not  thou  the  chastening  of  the  Lord,  nor  faint 


238  LIFE    OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

when  thou  art  rebuked  of  him ;  for  whom  the  Lord  loveth 
he  chasteneth,  and  scourgeth  every  son  whom  he  receiveth. 
If  ye  endure  chastening,  God  dealeth  with  you  as  with  sons ; 
for  what  son  is  he  whom  the  father  chasteneth  not  1  But 
if  ye  be  without  chastisement,  whereof  all  are  partakers, 
then  are  ye  bastards,  and  not  sons.  Furthermore,  we  have 
had  fathers  of  our  flesh  which  corrected  us,  and  we  gave 
them  reverence  :  shall  we  not  much  rather  be  subject  to  the 
Father  of  spirits,  and  live  1 '  Therefore,  let  us  all  be 
modest,  unassuming,  and  godlike,  pressing  on  to  the  mark. 
Let  us  not,  therefore,  judge  one  another  any  more.  Eom. 
14  :  13  :  '  But  judge  this  rather,  that  no  man  put  a  stum- 
bling-block or  an  occasion  to  fall  in  his  brother's  way.'  1 
Cor.  8  :  9 — 13  :  '  But  take  heed  lest  by  any  means  this 
liberty  of  yours  become  a  stumbling-block  to  them  that  are 
weak.  For  if  any  man  see  thee,  which  hast  knowledge,  sit 
at  meat  in  the  idols'  temple,  shall  not  the  conscience  of  him 
that  is  weak  be  emboldened  to  eat  those  things  which  are 
offered  to  idols  ;  and  through  thy  knowledge  shall  the  weak 
brother  perish,  for  whom  Christ  died  ?  But  when  ye  sin  so 
against  the  brethren,  and  wound  their  weak  conscience,  ye 
Bin  against  Christ,  "Wherefore,  if  meat  make  my  brother  to 
offend,  I  will  eat  no  flesh  while  the  world  standeth,  lest  I 
make  my  brother  to  offend.'  If  my  brother  is  truly  perfect 
in  every  good  work,  he  will  bear  with  me  and  my  weakness. 
Rom.  15  :  1  :  '  We,  then,  that  are  strong  ought  to  bear  the 
infirmities  of  the  weak,  and  not  to  please  ourselves.'  1  Cor. 
9  :  22  :  l  To  the  weak  became  I  as  weak,  that  I  might  gain 
the  weak :  I  am  made  all  things  to  all  men,  that  I  might  by 
all  means  save  some.'  I  have  not  written  this  to  condemn 
my  '  perfect '  brother,  or  to  call  out  a  reply.  He  may  call 
one  thing  perfect  sanctification,  and  I  another.  If  he  is 
'  perfect '  and  strong,  he  can  bear  my  weakness.  If  he 
wants  contention,  it  will  show  that  he  is  not  perfect,  but 
contentious.  I  beg  of  my  brother  to  let  me  follow  on  to 
know  the  Lord ;  and  God  forbid  that  I  should  call  him  back. 
I  hope  he  will  not  boastingly  exclude  me  from  the  path  he 
would  tread.  May  God  sanctify  and  prepare  us  for  his  own 
use,  and  deliver  us  from  the  wrath  to  come. 
"  Yours,  in  the  blessed  hope, 

"  William  Miller. 
"  Castleton,  Vt.,  Oct.  12,  1843." 


EMOTIONS   IN   VIEW    OF   THE   ADVENT.  239 

Not  only  Mr.  Miller,  but  all  -who  were  in  his  confidence, 
took  a  decided  position  against  all  fanatical  extravagances. 
They  never  gave  them  any  quarter ;  while  those  who  re- 
garded them  with  favor  soon  arrayed  themselves  against 
Mr.  Miller  and  his  adherents.  Their  fanaticism  increased  ; 
and  though  opposed  by  Mr.  Miller  and  his  friends,  the 
religious  and  secular  press  very  generally,  but  unjustly, 
connected  his  name  with  it ;  —  he  being  no  more  responsible 
for  it  than  Luther  and  Wesley  were  for  similar  manifesta- 
tions in  their  day. 


CHAPTER    XVII. 

EMOTIONS  IN  VIEW  OF  THE  ADVENT  NEAR  —  HOME  OE  MR.  MILLER 
TOUR  INTO  WESTERN  NEW  YORK HIS  PERSONAL  APPEAR- 
ANCE —  ADDRESS  TO  ALL  DENOMINATIONS VISIT  TO  WASHING- 
TON,   ETC. 

The  state  of  the  cause  at  this  time,  and  the  state  of  mind 
produced  by  the  belief  of  the  Advent  near,  was  very  truth- 
fully and  impartially  depicted  by  Rev.  Alexander  Campbell, 
President  of  Bethany  College,  Ya.,  in  the  following  article, 
copied  from  the  "  Millennial  Harbinger. " 

"As  time  advances,  the  doctrine  of  the  Second  Advent 
in  18-13  gains  new  interest,  and  grasps  with  a  stronger  hold 
the  minds  of  all  who  assent  to  its  strong  probability.  This 
is  just  what  we  expected  and  predicted  since  first  we  heard 
its  annunciation,  Excitement  keeps  pace  with  every  new 
convert,  and  consequently  has  not  yet  reached  its  proper 
height.  The  ardently  pious  and  strongly  imaginative  pro- 
claimers  of  the  world's  immediate  end,  in  their  untiring 
efforts  to  propagate  the  opinion  in  such  a  community  as  this, 
cannot  fail  to  influence  thousands,  and  to  inflame  their  zeal 
to  the  highest  enthusiasm.  What  topic  more  sublime,  more 
soul-subduing,  more  delightful  to  the  Christian,  than  that  of 
the  Lord's  glorious  return  to  judge  the  world,  to  reward  his 
friends  and  punish  his  enemies?  Talk  they  of  sublime 
themes  !  Methinks  the  most  sublime  of  all  that  earth  and 
time  afford  are  the  veriest  commonplaces  compared  with  this* 
21* 


240  LIFE    OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

"Many  sincere  and  conscientious  spirits  are  already 
enrolled  amongst  its  advocates,  and  some  of  them  are  not 
only  sincere,  but  pure,  and  noble,  and  amiable  Christians. 
These  are  the  great  apostles  of  the  theory,  to  whose  virtues 
and  excellences  the  cause  is  mainly  indebted  for  its  com- 
parative success.  Its  temples  are  festooned  with  Christian 
charity.  Its  altars  are  covered  with  the  garlands  and 
wreaths  of  piety  and  humanity.  Its  priests  wear  the  coronal 
of  elevated  sanctity,  and  its  votaries  are  from  necessity  all 
more  learned  in  the  symbols  of  prophecy  than  those  who 
oppose  them. 

"  Everything  in  society  is  now  favorable  to  the  rapid 
propagation  of  the  new  theory.  The  prevailing  ignorance 
of  the  Bible,  and  especially  of  prophecy,  on  the  part  of 
many  who  declaim  against  '  Millerism,'  and  the  unfortunate 
essays  of  learned  men  in  their  zeal  for  old  opinions,  so  far 
transcending  the  oracles  of  reason  and  the  canons  of  common 
sense,  have  contributed  no  little  to  advance  into  public  favor 
the  doctrine  of  :  the  Second  Advent  near.'  Amongst  these 
essays  may  stand  first  that  of  Professor  Stuart,  whose  high 
attainments  in  biblical  learning  I  highly  appreciate.  That 
essay,  already  trumpeted  by  a  thousand  voices,  republished 
in  various  forms  by  distinguished  preachers  and  writers 
from  Boston  to  Cincinnati, —  by  the  Colvers,  the  Stows,  and 
the  Mahans  of  this  land, —  has  greatly  aided  c  The  Signs 
of  the  Times  '  and  '  The  Midnight  Cries  '  of  the  new 
school  of  prophetic  expositors. 

"But  more  than  any  other  individual  cause  have  the 
profane  scoffings,  falsehoods,  and  caricatures  of  the  religious 
and  political  press,  in  opposition  to  the  doctrine  of  the 
'  Second  Advent  near/  contributed  to  confirming  the  minds 
of  the  initiated  in  the  pleasing  hope,  and  to  the  furnishing 
of  their  preachers  with  new  '  signs  of  the  times 5  in 
arguing  the  certainty  of  their  opinions.  If  Noah,  Daniel, 
and  Job,  had  reappeared  in  the  person  of  friend  Miller,  and 
uttered  the  oracles  of  the  Lord,  they  would  have  been 
derided,  slandered,  misrepresented,  and  denounced  as  dis- 
turbers of  the  peace  of  the  world's  giddy  dance,  andtroublers 
of  the  modern  Israel  in  her  one  hundred  and  one  fractions 
of  orthodox  proscription,  just  as  Mr.  Miller  and  his  party 
have  been. 


EMOTIONS  IN   VIEW   OF  THE  ADVENT.  241 

"  Another  reason  of  the  assurance  of  the  faith  in  the 
minds  of  those  who  are  true  believers  of  the  doctrine,  is  the 
delightful  state  of  mind  into  which  they  feel  themselves 
inducted  through  the  new  theory.  Every  righteous  man 
must  feel  an  exquisite  pleasure  in  the  strongly  anticipated 
immediate  return  of  his  Lord.  What  possible  event  could 
be  hailed  with  such  overwhelming  joy  as  the  end  of  this  sin- 
distracted  and  convulsed  world,  and  the  beginning  of  a  new 
creation,  in  which,  as  Christians,  all  hope  to  participate? 
New  heavens,  illumined  with  an  unsetting  sun  of  ineffable 
glory,  spangled  with  stars  brighter1  far  than  our  present 
sun ;  a  new  earth,  surrounded  with  an  immortal  atmosphere, 
filled  with  unfading  freshness,  sweetness,  and  beauty,  dec- 
orated with  charms  incomparably  superior  to  those  of  Eden 
and  its  ancient  Paradise,  animated  too  with  the  presence  of 
nature's  eternal  and  immortal  King  and  his  celestial  train, 
the  eternal  home  of  the  saints,  where  c  sin  and  sorrow,  pain 
and  death,  are  felt  and  feared  no  more.'  I  say,  who  would 
not  gladly  exchange  a  sin-emaciated  face,  a  shattered  con- 
stitution, sown  thick  with  the  seeds  of  death,  for  a  spiritual 
and  immortal  frame ;  a  shipwrecked  earth,  filled  with  un- 
quenchable fires,  convulsed  with  interminable  agonies,  and 
covered  with  floods  of  water  that  have  washed  and  drenched 
its  deeply  furrowed  face  with  a  thousand  mountains  and 
valleys,  for  a  new  earth  never  to  be  trodden  by  the  profane 
foot  of  a  solitary  prodigal,  nor  marred  by  the  unsanctified 
touch  of  a  rebel  hand,  during  the  ceaseless  ages  of  eternity  ! 

"  None  on  earth  are  more  to  be  envied  than  those  happy 
spirits  who  are  wrought  up,  or  have  wrought  themselves  up, 
to  the  full  persuasion  that  in  one  short  year,  a  little  less  or 
more,  and  they  shall  most  certainly  realize  all  this.  Me- 
thinks  to  such  the  year  1843  will  pass  along  with  dreams  of 
felicity  and  sweet  antepasts  of  blessedness,  whose  remem- 
brance will,  in  years  to  come,  be  as  the  delightful  oasis  in  a 
parched  desert, — as  the  vision  of  a  Paul  caught  away  into 
the  celestial  Paradise,  into  the  purer  climes  of  the  third 
heavens.  And  all  this,  too,  without  even  the  parting  pang 
which  nature  feels  when  {  shuffling  off  this  mortal  coil,'  and 
bidding  a  long  adieu  to  those  we  leave  behind.  For  in  a 
moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  perhaps  during  some 
prayer  or  song  of  praise,  while  in  the  midst  of  a  mono- 


242  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

syllable,  one  half  uttered  in  time,  the  other  in  eternity,  — 
the  first  accent  from  a  mortal,  the  second  from  an  immortal 
tongue,  crystallized  into  a  gem  in  less  than  time's  shortest 
mark  or  minutest  point, — we  have  passed  the  bourn  of  mor- 
tality, and  are  found  dwelling  not  in  houses  of  clay,  founded 
in  the  dust,  but  in  a  house  from  heaven,  spiritual,  incor- 
ruptible, immortal,  and  glorious.  And  all  this,  too,  I  re- 
peat, without  the  pain  of  parting  from  one  we  love.  We 
cast  not  one  i  longing,  lingering  look  behind.'  None  are 
left  we  care  anything  about.  Nature,  flesh,  and  all  earth's 
associations,  are  forever  left  without  one  single  feeling  that 
time  or  sense  endear.  What  a  mysterious,  delightful,  in- 
effable moment  that  in  which  mortality  is  swallowed  up  in 
life ;  in  which  we  obtain  beauty  for  ashes,  joy  for  mourning, 
the  garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness ;  in  which 
we  part  from  sin,  and  sorrow,  and  woe,  and  find  ourselves 
at  home  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  in  the  bosom  of  his 
love,  surrounded  with  all  the  sons  of  light,  with  the  riches 
and  glory  of  the  New  Jerusalem  temple,  thronged  with  the 
great  hierarchs  and  kings  of  all  the  dominions  of  Eternity  ! 
Who,  of  the  Christian  family,  would  not  rejoice  with  joy 
unspeakable  and  full  of  glory,  that  in  a  few  months  all  this 
should  transpire,  and  that  without  the  least  of  all  the 
agonies  of  death; — perhaps  fall  asleep  some  night,  and 
awaken  glorified  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  hearing,  with 
an  immortal  ear,  the  last  echo  of  the  grave-opening,  body- 
reanimating,  soul- transforming  sound  of  the  archangel's 
trumpet ! 

f  ■  No  doctrine,  then,  more  cheering  than  that  of  '  the 
Second  Advent  near;'  no  opinion  produces  a  more  delight- 
ful state  of  mind." 

In  the  interval  between  Mr.  Miller's  return  from  Boston 
to  his  home  at  Low  Hampton  and  the  recommencement  of 
his  public  labors,  he  was  visited  by  his  dearly  beloved 
friend,  the  late  Elder  Nathaniel  Southard,  who  wrote  as 
follows  of 

"THE   HOME    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER, 

"  It  was  Saturday  forenoon  when  we  passed  over  the  rough 
road,  and  stopped  at  a  one-storied  house,  where  a  post-office 


MR,  miller's  home.  243 

is  kept.  It  is  the  residence  of  William  S.,  oldest  son  of  Bro. 
Miller,  P.  M.,  at  the  office,  which,  for  distinction,  is  called 
Low  Hampton.  He  was  not  at  home  ;  but  one  of  his  little 
daughters  told  us  the  residence  of  her  grandfather  was  in 
sight  on  the  hill.  Without  waiting  for  her  to  point  it  out, 
I  easily  recognized  it  —  from  previous  description  —  among 
the  good-looking  farm-houses  in  sight.  It  was  not  the 
largest  or  handsomest.  The  back  part  of  it  only,  which  is 
painted  red,  could  be  seen.  It  is  two  stories  high.  The 
northern  front  and  ends  are  painted  white.  On  the  way  we 
passed  the  small  plain  meeting-house  of  the  Baptist  church 
to  which  Bro.  M.  belongs. 

• '  At  the  gate  of  his  hospitable  mansion  we  met  a  young  man 
in  a  wagon,  with  crutches  by  his  side,  whose  round  open  coun- 
tenance showed  him  to  be  a  son  of  William  Miller.  He  gave 
us  a  cordial  invitation  to  enter.  Three  visitors  were  already 
in  the  house,  to  whom  myself,  wife  and  child,  being  added, 
made  a  number  which  we  feared  would  be  burdensome.  We 
soon  found  ourselves  perfectly  at  home,  though  we  had  never 
before  seen  one  of  the  family  but  its  venerable  head. 

"  The  next  day  five  other  visitors  arrived,  one  of  whom  was 
a  lady  from  Iowa,  and  three  from  Vergennes.  The  day  was 
very  stormy.  We  went  to  the  place  of  worship,  and  found 
a  congregation  consisting  of  fewer  persons  than  we  left  at 
the  house.  The  preacher,  Bro.  Increase  Jones,  gave  a 
plain,  practical  sermon  on  the  text,  '  The  end  of  all  things 
is  at  hand ;  be  ye  therefore  sober,  and  watch  unto  prayer.' 
In  the  afternoon  we  opened  the  Scriptures,  and  tried  to  pur- 
sue the  apostolic  method  in  speaking  of  Jesus  and  the  resur- 
rection. 

"  On  our  way  from  the  meeting,  after  referring  to  the  num- 
ber of  guests,  we  asked  Bobbins  if  they  usually  had  as  much 
company. 

"  '  Pretty  nigh,'  said  he;  'I  wish  I  had  kept  count  of 
the  number  of  visitors  for  the  last  six  months.' 

"  '  Did  they  come  in  such  numbers  when  Bro.  Miller  was 
sick  1 '  we  inquired. 

"  '  It  seemed  to  make  but  little  difference,'  he  replied. 

"  We  just  then  passed  by  the  open  carriage  gate  into  the 
spacious  enclosure  at  the  west  end  of  the  house. 

5  It  seemed  to  be  the  hardest  task,'  he  proceeded,  l  to 


cc  i ■ 


244  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM  MILLER. 

make  friends  understand  that  it  was  not  friendly  to  visit  a 
sick  man  in  such  numbers.  I  have  had  to  stand  here  and 
keep  people  out  of  the  house,  and  sometimes  there  were  six 
asking  admission  at  once.' 

"  As  it  was,  I  have  no  doubt  company  added  weeks  to  his 
sickness,  and  dollars  to  the  doctor's  bills.  I  afterwards 
learnt  that  the  expenses  of  his  sickness  were  one  hundred 
dollars. 

"  Let  us  try  to  get  a  glimpse  at  his  wealth  and  resources. 
Twelve  years  ago  he  was  the  owner  of  about  two  hundred 
acres  of  land,  less  than  half  of  which  was  capable  of  cultiva- 
tion, yielding  a  liberal  return  to  hard  labor.  No  one,  who 
knows  with  what  energy,  diligence,  and  firmness,  Bro.  Miller 
has  prosecuted  the  labors  he  seems  to  have  been  raised  up  to 
perform,  will  need  to  be  told  that  he  is  a  man  of  industrious, 
temperate,  and  frugal  habits.  Such  a  man.  in  such  a  place, 
with  a  help  meet  for  him,  could  not  be  poor  and  thriftless. 
Twenty-five  years  ago  he  built  his  house.  Other  buildings 
were  erected  as  they  became  necessary,  but  none  within  the 
last  dozen  years,  except  a  bee-house,  and  small,  plain  shed, 
or  boiling-house,  where  food  is  prepared  for  his  hogs.  He 
showed  me  his  home  farm,  consisting  of  ninety-six  acres, 
lying  wholly  on  the  south  side  of  the  road.  There  is  some 
common  wall  upon  it ;  but  the  moss-grown,  weather-beaten 
stones  unanimously  contradict  the  foolish  and  malicious  lies 
which  have  been  told  about  its  recent  origin.  He  also  owns 
a  rough  tract  of  fifty  acres,  north  of  the  road,  and  twenty 
acres  of  interval  a  little  distance  to  the  east.  When  he  let 
out  his  farm  to  his  son,  he  sold  him  §500  worth  of  stock, 
and  has  since  sold  seventy  acres  of  land  to  his  son-in-law. 
What  he  has  thus  realized,  and  $100  yearly  for  the  use  of 
his  farm,  have  enabled  him  to  meet  the  expenses  of  travelling, 
printing,  and  giving  away  books,  company,  sickness,  &c. 

"  He  has  brought  up  eight  children,  two  others  having  died 
in  early  life.  His  whole  family,  like  Job's,  originally  con- 
sisted of  seven  sons  and  three  daughters.  Four  of  them 
are  now  in  the  house  with  him,  and  two  sons  are  at  the 
West.  As  a  specimen  of  the  fertility  of  his  farm,  he  showed 
us  a  potato  weighing  two  pounds  and  seven  ounces. 

"  While  contemplating  this  lovely  family,  and  their  plain 
but  comfortable  dwelling-place,  equally  free  from  the  marks 


MR.  miller's  home.  245 

of  wasteful  neglect  or  extravagant  expenditure.  I  saw,  never  as 
I  saw  before,  the  folly  and  malignity  of  those  falsehoods  which 
have  been  so  industriously  told  about  them.     Look  at  them. 

"  A  diligent  student  of  the  Bible  tells  us  he  finds  prophetic 
periods  reaching  down  to  the  resurrection  and  the  second 
coming  of  Christ. 

"  '  Nonsense ! '  cries  one,  who  must  stand  at  the  judgment 
seat  of  Christ ;  '  Mr.  Miller  is  a  man  of  property,  and  he 
holds  on  to  it.' 

" l  But  won't  you  please  to  look  in  the  Bible,  and  see  the 
evidence  that  these  periods  are  just  running  out?' 

11  c  Humbug  ! '  says  another,  who  must  give  an  account  for 
the  manner  in  which  he  treats  that  message  from  heaven  ; 
<  Mr.  Miller  is  building  a  solid  brick  wall  round   his  farm.' 

"  l  But  will  you  not  consider  and  discern  the  signs  of  the 
times,  which  show  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  nigh,  even 
at  the  doors  1 ' 

ucIt  is  all  a  money-making  scheme,'  says  a  third,  who 
must  soon  give  up  his  stewardship ;  '  Mr.  Miller  is  putting 
up  some  large  buildings  in  New  Haven,  and  he  has  a  barrel 
of  jewels  in  his  house,  which  have  been  given  him  where  he 
has  preached.' 

"  The  amazing  stupidity  of  these  fictions  almost  hides  from 
view  the  malice  which  invented  them.  But  when  we  look 
at  his  wife  and  daughter,  to  whom  a  husband  and  father's 
reputation  is  as  the  apple  of  the  eye,  wTe  begin  to  feel  them 
as  a  personal  injury,  though  they  are  nothing,  in  this  view, 
in  comparison  with  the  public  mischief  they  occasion. 

"  Bro.  Miller's  faith  remains  unwavering.  He  said  he 
should  be  happy  if  he  felt  as  sure  of  heaven  as  he  did  that  he 
had  the  truth  on  the  prophecies  of  Daniel. 

'•His  eyesight  is  improved  since  his  sickness,  so  that  he 
now  uses  spectacles  which  he  had  laid  aside  as  being  too 
young  several  years  ago.  He  reads  the  small  Polyglot 
Bible  with  the  greatest  ease.  He  is  a  diligent  reader  of 
Second  Advent  papers.  After  he  has  received  one  he  sel- 
dom lays  it  aside  till  he  has  become  acquainted  with  all 
its  contents.  The  rest  of  his  reading  is  nearly  confined  to 
the  Scriptures.  He  is  able  to  write  freely,  and  it  requires 
no  small  share  of  his  time  to  attend  to  the  numerous  letters 
he  receives. 


246  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

11  He  starts  early  next  week  (Providence  permitting)  on  his 
way  to  Rochester,  Lockport,  and  Buffalo,  N.  Y.  It  will  be 
necessary  for  one  of  his  sons  to  accompany  him,  as  he  is  not 
strong  enough  to  travel  alone. 

"  We  were  interested  in  seeing  his  old  family  Bible,  which 
cost  $18.50,  and  his  quarto  copy  of  Cruden's  Concordance, 
which  was  originally  purchased,  in  1798,  for  $8.  These  two 
books  were  almost  the  only  ones  he  looked  at  while  prepar- 
ing his  lectures.  A  clergyman  once  called  at  his  house  in  his 
absence,  and,  being  disappointed  in  not  seeing  him,  wished  the 
privilege  of  looking  at  his  library.  His  daughter  conducted 
the  visitor  into  the  north-east  room,  where  he  has  sat  so  many 
hours  at  his  ancient  desk.  Those  two  books,  and  no  others, 
lay  upon  the  table.  '  That  is  his  library,'  said  she.  The 
clergyman  was  amazed.  Her  remark  was  strictly  true,  as  far 
as  theological  writings  were  concerned.  He  never  had  a 
commentary  in  his  house,  and  did  not  remember  reading  any 
work  upon  the  prophecies,  except  Newton  and  Faber,  about 
thirty  years  ago. 

"  When  we  spoke  to  him  about  the  stories  in  relation  to  his 
property  in  New  Haven,  he  pleasantly  remarked  that  those 
who  believed  them  could  easily  satisfy  themselves ;  for  he 
had  sold  to  Bro.  McDonald,  of  Williamsburg,  near  New  York 
city,  all  his  property,  real  or  personal,  out  of  Low  Hampton, 
for  five  dollars,  and  the  purchaser  had  offered  to  give  half  of 
it  to  any  one  who  would  find  any. 

u  Monday  afternoon  we  reluctantly  took  leave  of  this  peace- 
ful spot,  which  had  been  our  pleasant  home  for  two  days, 
rejoicing  that  calumny  could  there  find  no  truthful  basis  on 
which  to  found  its  reckless  and  cruel  assertions. 

"  N.  Southard. 

"  Carleton,  Vt.}  October  23,  1843." 

In  company  with  his  wife  and  son  George,  Mr.  Miller 
started  for  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  on  the  9th  of  November.  On 
his  passage  down  the  canal  from  Whitehall  to  Albany,  by 
request  of  the  passengers  on  the  boat,  he  spoke  to  an  atten- 
tive audience  from  Titus  2  :  13. 

From  the  12th  to  the  19th  of  November,  he  gave  his  first 
course  of  lectures  in  the  city  of  Rochester,  speaking  to  full 
houses  on  the  afternoon  and  evening  of  each  day.     The 


PUBLIC   LECTURES.  247 

ground  had  been  previously  prepared  for  him  by  a  course  of 
lectures  in  June,  delivered  by  Mr.  Ilimcs  and  others,  in  con- 
nection with  the  "  great  tent." 

Mr.  Himes  had  commenced  a  paper  there,  called  the  "  Glad 
Tidings,"  and  published  thirteen  numbers  of  it,  which  were 
extensively  circulated  ;  and  the  late  Elder  Thomas  F.  Barry, 
a  devoted  brother,  had  remained  in  that  field  during  the  sum- 
mer. By  those  instrumentalities  quite  an  interest  had  been 
created,  and  the  labors  of  Mr.  Miller  there  were  abundantly 
blessed. 

Receiving  a  pressing  invitation  from  Rev.  Elon  Galusha, 
pastor  of  the  Baptist  church,  and  sixty-eight  others,  in  Lock- 
port,  N.  Y.,  to  visit  that  place,  he  lectured  there  from  the 
21st  to  the  30th  of  November.  The  salvation  of  some  souls, 
and  a  general  expression  of  interest  in  the  subject  of  his  dis- 
courses, were  the  result  of  his  labors. 

From  the  2d  to  the  10th  of  December  he  lectured  in  Buf- 
falo, N.  Y.,  in  the  theatre,  to  a  house  full  of  attentive  hearers. 
Writing  from  that  place,  on  the  4th,  he  says  :  "  Yesterday  I 
saw  the  tears  of  some  in  the  congregation,  who,  I  am  informed, 
were  old,  hardened  infidels." 

In  compliance  with  an  invitation  from  Rev.  A.  Claghorn, 
pastor  of  the  Baptist  church,  and  twenty-three  others,  he 
next  lectured  in  Lewiston,  N.  Y.,  from  the  11th  to  the  17th 
of  December.  There  w^ere  many  hearers  present  from 
Canada,  as  well  as  from  the  American  side  of  the  line,  who 
gave  him  a  respectful  hearing.  Writing  respecting  this 
place,  Mr.  M.  says  : 

1 '  I  was  here,  as  at  Rochester  and  Lockport,  challenged  to 
a  public  debate  by  a  Universalist.  I  will  not  contend  with 
them.  It  would  be  an  admission  that  they  might  be  right, 
which  I  cannot  for  a  moment  believe.  Michael  would  not 
contend  with  the  devil.  Why  ?  Because  he  would  not 
admit  he  could  be  right.  Was  he  afraid  of  the  devil  ?  No. 
But  he  said,  '  The  Lord  rebuke  thee,  Satan  !  '  And  so  say 
I  to  his  ministers." 

Being  invited  to  visit  Penfield,  N.  Y.,  by  Rev.   David 

Bernard  and  the  unanimous  vote  of  his  church,  he  lectured 

in  the  Baptist  meeting-house  there,  from   the  20th  to  the 

27th  of  December.     Some  souls  professed  conversion,  and 

22 


248  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM  MILLER. 

the  pastor  and  a  number  of  his  people  avowed  their  faith  in 
the  near  coming  of  Christ. 

Mr.  Miller  returned  to  Kochester  on  the  29th  of  Decem- 
ber, continued  there  a  few  days,  gave  five  discourses,  and,  on 
the  3d  of  January,  1844,  he  left  for  home  by  the  way  of 
Troy.     After  reaching  Low  Hampton,  he  wrote  : 

"  On  Saturday,  January  6th,  I  arrived  home,  having  been 
absent  about  eight  weeks,  and  given  eighty-five  lectures.  I 
have  seen  a  number  of  infidels  converted  to  God  ;  and  more 
than  one  hundred  have  obtained  a  hope  where  I  have  been." 

On  the  28th  of  January  he  again  visited  Boston,  and  gave 
a  course  of  lectures  in  the  Howard-street  Tabernacle.  This 
was  his  ninth  visit  to  Boston,  and  his  seventh  regular  course 
of  lectures  there.  On  no  previous  occasion  had  such  crowds 
been  present  to  hear  as  were  then  assembled  in  that  capa- 
cious building.  On  the  Sabbath  (January  28th),  all  day  and 
evening,  the  seats  and  aisles  were  filled  with  as  many  as  could 
find  a  place  to  sit  or  stand.  Many  of  the  young,  with  the 
middle-aged,  and  even  men  with  gray  hairs,  stood  and  lis- 
tened to  the  story  of  the  coming  One,  with  the  evidences  of 
his  near  approach.  Had  the  Tabernacle  been  twice  its  size, 
it  would  hardly  have  held  the  multitude  who  sought  admit- 
tance. The  interest  continued  during  his  entire  course  of 
lectures,  which  closed  on  the  4th  of  February. 

On  the  5th  of  February,  in  company  with  Mr.  Himes,  he 
left  for  New  York  city  ;  but  the  weather  was  inclement,  the 
boat  was  delayed  in  the  Sound  all  the  next  day  by  ice,  and 
the  passage  was  uncommonly  tedious.  Mr.  Fowler,  the 
phrenologist,  being  one  of  the  passengers,  to  while  away  the 
time  he  gave,  by  request,  a  lecture  on  his  science.  After 
the  lecture  he  was  blindfolded,  and  in  that  state  examined 
quite  a  number  of  heads.  At  the  request  of  the  company, 
Mr.  Miller's  head  was  examined.  All  were  eager  to  hear 
the  opinion  of  the  lecturer.     Among  other  things  he  said  : 

"This  man  has  large  benevolence.  His  object  is  to  do 
his  fellow-beings  good.  He  has  great  firmness  —  is  a  mod- 
est man,  open,  frank,  no  hypocrite,  good  at  figures,  a  man 
of  great  mental  power,  might  make  a  noise  in  the  world,  has 
no  personal  enemies ;  if  he  has  enemies,  it  is  not  because 
they  know  him,  but  on  account  of  his  opinions." 

At  the  close  of  the  examination  his  blindfold  was  removed, 


PUBLIC   LECTURES.  249 

and  he  was  introduced  to  Mr.  Miller,  to  the  no  small  amuse- 
ment of  the  company. 

They  arrived  in  New  York  on  the  evening  of  the  6th  of 
February,  1844,  and  found  a  conference  assembled  in  Frank- 
lin Hall.  Mr.  Miller  gave  two  discourses  there  on  the  7th  ; 
when,  finding  the  place  too  small,  they  adjourned  to  the 
Broadway  Tabernacle,  where  he  lectured,  in  the  afternoon 
and  evening  of  the  8th  and  9th  of  February,  to  crowded  as- 
semblies. It  was  estimated  that  not  less  than  five  thousand 
persons  were  present.  The  audiences  were  solemn  and  at- 
tentive. 

On  the  10th  of  February  they  went  to  Philadelphia,  and 
on  the  11th  Mr.  M.  commenced  a  course  of  lectures  in  the 
saloon  of  the  Chinese  Museum,  —  closing  on  the  18th.  That 
immense  hall  was  filled  to  overflowing. 

While  laboring  here,  a  friend  gave  the  following  descrip- 
tion of  Mr.  Miller's  personal  appearance : 

"  There  is  a  kindness  of  soul,  simplicity,  and  power,  pecu- 
liarly original,  combined  in  his  manner ;  and  he  is  affable 
and  attentive  to  all,  without  any  affectation  of  superiority. 
He  is  of  about  medium  stature,  a  little  corpulent,  and,  in  tem- 
perament, a  mixture  of  sanguine  and  nervous.  His  intellect- 
ual developments  are  unusually  full,  and  we  see  in  his  head 
great  benevolence  and  firmness,  united  with  a  lack  of  self- 
esteem.  He  is  wanting  in  marvellousness,  and  is  naturally 
sceptical.  His  countenance  is  full  and  round,  while  there  is 
a  peculiar  expression  in  his  blue  eye,  of  shrewdness  and  love. 
Although  about  sixty-two  years  of  age,  his  hair  is  not  gray, 
but  of  a  light  glossy  auburn ;  his  voice  is  full  and  distinct, 
and  his  pronunciation  somewhat  northern-antique.  In  his 
social  relations  he  is  gentle  and  affectionate,  and  insures  the 
esteem  of  all  with  whom  he  mingles.  In  giving  this  char- 
coal sketch  to  the  public,  I  have  merely  sought  to  correct 
numerous  misstatements,  and  gratify  the  honest  desire  of 
many  distant  believers  with  a  faint  outline  of  the  character 
and  appearance  of  the  man." 

While  drawing  crowded  houses  of  intelligent  and  atten- 
tive hearers,  his  name  was  seldom  mentioned  in  the  religious 
press,  except  by  way  of  ridicule  or  denunciation  ;  and  many 
churches,  particularly  those  of  his  own  denomination,  were 


250  LIFE     OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

taking  disciplinary  steps  with  those  who  had  embraced  his 
views.     This  called  forth  from  him  the  following 

u  ADDRESS    TO    BELIEVERS   IX    CHRIST    OF   ALL    DENOMINA- 
TIONS. 

fi  Dear  Brethren  :  —  "We  would  ask,  in  the  name  of  our 
dear  Master.  Jesus  Christ,  by  all  that  is  holy,  by  the  fellowship 
of  the  saints,  and  the  love  of  the  truth,  why  you  cast  us  off 
as  if  we  were  heretics  ?  What  have  we  believed,  that  we 
have  not  been  commanded  to  believe  by  the  word  of  God, 
which  you  yourselves  allow  is  the  rule  and  only  rule  of  our 
faith  and  practice  ?  What  have  we  done  that  should  call 
down  such  virulent  denunciations  against  us  from  pulpit  and 
press,  and  give  you  just  cause  to  exclude  us  (Adventists) 
from  your  churches  and-  fellowship  1  In  the  name  of  all 
that  is  dear,  all  that  is  holy  and  good,  we  call  upon  some  of 
you  to  come  out  and  tell  us  wherein  our  great  sin  lies.  Have 
we  denied  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints  ?  Tell  us. 
we  pray  you,  or,  wherein  is  our  fault  ?  If  there  is  an  honest 
man  among  you,  of  which  we  cannot  doubt,  we  shall  expect 
to  see  your  reasons  publicly  and  honestly  avowed  ;  and  if 
we  are  guilty  of  heresy  or  crime,  let  the  Christian  commu- 
nity know  it,  that  we  may  be  shunned  by  all  who  know  and 
love  the  truth. 

'•'Is  it  heterodox  to  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  will  come 
again  to  this  earth,  to  receive  his  saints  to  himself,  and  to 
reward  all  men  as  their  work  shall  be  1  If  so,  then  our 
fathers,  and  our  ministers,  our  creeds,  and  our  Bibles,  have 
taught  us  heresy ;  and  from  our  infancy  we  have  misunder- 
stood our  teachers,  and  misapplied  our  Bible.  Do  tell  us 
what  mean  a  class  of  texts  like  these  ?  John  14  :  3  :  '  And 
if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  will  come  again  and 
receive  you  unto  myself :  that  where  I  am  there  ye  may  be 
also.'  Acts  1  :  11  :  '  Which  also  said,  Ye  men  of  Galilee, 
why  stand  ye  gazing  up  into  heaven  ?  this  same  Jesus  which 
is  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven,  shall  so  come  in  like  man- 
ner as  ye  have  seen  him  go  into  heaven.5  1  Pet.  1  :  7 
and  13  :  '  That  the  trial  of  your  faith,  being  much  more 
precious  than  of  gold  that  perisheth,  though  it  may  be  tried 
with  fire,  might  be  found  unto  praise,  and  honor,  and  glory, 
at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ,     Wherefore,  gird  up  the 


ADDRESS   TO    BELIEVERS   IN   CHRIST.  251 

loins  of  your  mind,  be  sober,  and  hope  to  the  end  for  the 
grace  that  is  to  be  brought  unto  you  at  the  revelation  of 
Jesus  Christ,'  Rev.  1:7:  "  Behold,  he  cometh  with 
clouds ;  and  every  eye  shall  see  him,  and  they  also  which 
pierced  him ;  and  all  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  wail  because 
of  him.3 

"Does  our  crime  consist  in  our  looking  for  him  and  loving 
his  appearing  ?  This,  too,  we  charge  upon  our  fathers  and 
teachers  ;  we  have  heard,  ever  since  we  had  consciousness,  as 
our  duty  explained  and  enforced,  to  watch  and  look,  to  love 
and  be  prepared  for  his  return,  that  when  he  comes  we  may 
enter  into  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb.  We  also  have 
Christ  and  the  apostles  for  our  example  in  so  doing.  Wit- 
ness Matt,  24  :  44  ;  25  :  13  :  Mark  13  :  34— 3T  ;  Phil 
3:20.21;  2Tim.4:8;  Titus  2 :  13  :  2Pet.3:12;  Rev. 
14:  15. 

"  Or  are  we  to  be  severed  from  our  brethren  because  we 
believe  the  prophecies  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  to  be 
the  true  prophecies  of  God ;  or  because  that  we  think  we 
can  understand  them,  and  see  in  the  history  of  our  world 
their  fulfilment  1  Are  we  to  be  cut  off  from  our  connection 
with  your  churches  because  we  believe  as  your  ministers 
have  told  us  we  ought  to  for  ages  past  7  Acts  24  :  14  : 
(  But  this  I  confess  unto  you,  that  after  the  way  which  they 
call  heresy,  so  worship  I  the  God  of  my  fathers,  believing 
all  things  which  are  written  in  the  law  and  in  the  prophets." 
26  :  22  :  •  Having  therefore  obtained  help  of  God.  I  con- 
tinue unto  this  day,  witnessing  both  to  small  and  great,  say- 
ing none  other  things  than  those  which  the  prophets  and 
Moses  did  say  should  come.  King  Agrippa,  believest  thou 
the  prophets  1 '  1  Tim.  4  :  14  :  <  That  thou  keep  this 
commandment  without  spot,  unrebukable,  until  the  appear- 
ing of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.'  Rev.  1  :  4  :  l  Blessed  is  he 
that  readeth,  and  they  that  hear  the  words  of  this  prophecy, 
and  keep  those  things  which  are  written  therein ;  for  the 
time  is  at  hand.' 

11  Again,  let  me  inquire  :  Are  we  treated  as  heretics  be- 
cause we  believe  Christ  will  come  this  year  ?  Are  we  not 
all  commanded  to  watch  ?  Mark  13  :  37  :  "  And  what  I 
say  unto  you,  I  say  unto  all,  Watch.'  And  I  would  ask, 
Is  it  not  our  duty  to  watch  this  year  ?  If  so,  will  you  tell 
22* 


252  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

us  how  a  man  can  watch,  and  not  expect  the  object  for  which 
he  watches  ?  If  this  is  the  crime,  we  plead  guilty  to  the 
charge,  and  throw  ourselves  upon  the  word  of  God,  and  the 
example  of  our  fathers,  to  justify  us  in  so  doing.  Eccl.  8  : 
5,  6 :  i  Whoso  keepeth  the  commandments  shall  feel  no 
evil  thing  ;  and  a  wise  man's  heart  discerneth  both  time  and 
judgment;  because  to  every  purpose  there  is  time  and 
judgment.'  Dan.  12 :  6,  7 :  i  And  one  said  to  the  man. 
clothed  in  linen,  which  was  upon  the  waters  of  the  river, 
How  long  shall  it  be  to  the  end  of  these  wonders  ?  And  I 
heard  the  man  clothed  in  linen,  which  was  upon  the  waters 
of  the  river,  when  he  held  up  his  right  hand  and  his  left 
hand  unto  heaven,  and  sware  by  him  that  liveth  forever, 
that  it  shall  be  for  a  time,  times,  and  a  half ;  and  when  he 
shall  have  accomplished  to  scatter  the  power  of  the  holy  peo- 
ple, all  these  things  shall  be  finished.'  1  Peter,  1 :  9, 
13 :  '  Receiving  the  end  of  your  faith,  even  the  salvation 
of  your  souls.  Of  which  salvation  the  prophets  have  in- 
quired and  searched  diligently,  who  prophesied  of  the  grace 
that  should  come  unto  you ;  searching  what,  or  what  man- 
ner of  time,  the  spirit  of  Christ  which  was  in  them  did 
signify,  when  it  testified  beforehand  the  sufferings  of  Christ, 
and  the  glory  that  should  follow.  Unto  whom  it  was  re- 
vealed, that  not  unto  themselves,  but  unto  us  they  did  minis- 
ter the  things  which  are  now  reported  unto  you  by  them 
that  have  preached  the  gospel  unto  you,  with  the  Holy 
Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven;  which  things  the  an  wis 
desire  to  look  into.  Wherefore,  gird  up  the  loins  of  your 
mind,  be  sober,  and  hope  to  the  end  for  the  grace  that  is  to 
be  brought  unto  you  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.' 

"  Now,  if  we  are  wrong,  pray  show  us  wherein  consists  our 
wrong.  Show  us  from  the  word  of  God  that  we  are  in  error  ; 
we  have  had  ridicule  enough ;  that  can  never  convince  us 
that  we  are  in  the  wrong ;  the  word  of  God  alone  can  change 
our  views.  Our  conclusions  have  been  formed  deliberately 
and  prayerfully,  as  we  have  seen  the  evidence  in  the  Scrip- 
tures ;  and  all  reasoning  against  our  views  has  only  served 
to  confirm  us  in  them. 

61  Or,  are  you  ready  to  say  that  our  crime  consists  in  exam- 
ining the  Bible  for  ourselves  ?  We  have  inquired  '  Watch- 
man, what  of  the  night  ? '  we  have  besought  and  entreated 


LECTURES   IN   WASHINGTON.  253 

them  to  give  us  any  signs  of  the  coming  morning,  and  have 
waited  patiently  for  an  answer ;  but  have  Waited  in  vain  ; 
have  been  turned  off  with  some  German  or  French  philoso- 
phy, or  had  the  book  closed  in  our  face,  and  been  insulted 
for  our  deep  anxiety.  We  have,  therefore,  been  obliged  to 
study  for  ourselves  :  and  if  we  are  to  be  cut  off  for  honestly 
believing  in  the  exactness  of  prophetic  time,  then  Scott,  and 
Wesley,  and  the  Newtons,  and  Mede,  Gill,  and  others,  should 
all  be  excommunicated  for  the  like  offence.  We,  therefore, 
once  more  call  upon  you  to  show  us  our  errors  :  and  until 
this  is  done,  we  must  continue  to  believe  the  Lord  will  come 
in  this  Jewish  year.  Wm.  Miller."7 

On  the  17th  of  February.  Messrs.  Miller,  Himes,  and 
Elder  Josiah  Litch,  left  Philadelphia  for  Washington  city, 
which  they  reached  on  the  20th.  On  the  evening  of  that 
day  they  held  their  first  meeting  in  the  Baptist  house,  near 
the  Navy-yard.  It  became  so  thronged  that,  on  the  26th, 
they  removed  to  the  Apollo  Hall,  near  the  President's  man- 
sion, where  they  continued  till  the  2d  of  March. 

During  these  lectures,  on  the  28th  of  February,  the 
''Peacemaker/''  on  board  of  the  ''Princeton,57  exploded, 
killing  Colonel  Gardiner  and  Mr.  Upshur,  the  United  States 
Secretary  of  State,  and  wounding  others.  That  event  added 
interest  and  solemnity  to  the  lectures,  and  caused  them  to 
be  more  fully  attended.  There  were  present  at  the  lectures 
a  goodly  number  of  persons  belonging  to  both  houses  of 
Congress. 

Writing  from  Washington  on  the  clay  of  that  explosion, 
but  before  the  occurrence,  Mr.  Miller  said  : 

':  They  throng  us  constantly  for  papers,  books,  and 
tracts,  which  Brother  Himes  *is  scattering  gratuitously  by 
thousands,  containing  information  on  this  subject.  They 
send  in  from  this  vicinity  and  from  { old  Virginia '  for 
papers  and  lecturers  ;  but  the  one-hundredth  part  of  their 
requests  can  never  be  complied  with.  Never  have  I  been 
listened  to  with  so  deep  a  feeling,  and  with  such  intense 
interest,  for  hours.'7 

Mr.  Miller  gave  nineteen  lectures  in  this  place,  and 
Messrs.  Himes  and  Litch  fifteen. 

Calls  for  them  to  extend  their  tour  further  south  came  up 


254  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

from  Charleston,  S.  C,  Savannah,  Geo.,  Mobile,  Ala.,  and 
from  many  other  of  the  larger  places  in  the  Southern  States. 
Some  of  these  were  very  importunate,  but  previous  arrange- 
ments prevented  a  compliance  with  those  requests. 

They  returned  north,  held  meetings  in  Baltimore  from 
the  3d  to  the  8th  of  March,  and,  on  the  9th,  returned  to 
Philadelphia.  There  Mr.  Miller  gave  two  more  discourses 
on  the  10th ;  on  the  11th  he  lectured  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  in 
the  Free  Presbyterian  meeting-house  ;  on  the  12th  he  gave 
one  discourse  in  New  York  ;  on  the  13th  he  spoke  in 
Brooklyn  and  Williamsburg,  N.  Y.,  and  on  the  14th  he 
returned  to  Low  Hampton. 

He  seems  to  have  kept  no  minute  of  his  subsequent 
labors,  but  closes  his  note-book,  at  the  termination  of  this 
tour,  with  these  words:  "Now  I  have  given,  since  1832, 
three  thousand  tico  hundred  lectures:'' 


CHAPTER    XVIII. 

THE     PASSING     OF    THE    TIME HIS    POSITION  —  THE    BURNING    DAY 

—  LINES      ON      HIS      DISAPPOINTMENT CONFESSION VISIT      OF 

ELDER    LITCH MR.    MILLER    AND    THE    METHODIST    MINISTERS 

TOUR    TO    OHIO  RETURN,    ETC. 

The  vernal  equinox  of  1844  was  the  furthest  point  of 
time  to  which  Mr.  Miller's  calculation  of  the  prophetic 
periods  extended.  When  this  time  passed,  he  wrote  to  Mr. 
Himes  as  follows  : 

"Low  Hampton,  March  25th,  1844. 

"  My  dear  Brother  Himes  :  — I  am  now  seated  at  my 
old  desk  in  my  east  room,  having  obtained  help  of  God  until 
the  present  time.  I  am  still  looking  for  the  dear  Saviour, 
the  Son  of  God,  from  heaven  ;  and  for  the  fulfilment  of  the 
promise  made  to  our  fathers,  and  confirmed  to  them  that 
heard  Him, —  that  he  would  come  again,  and  would  receive 
us  unto  himself:  gathering  together  in  one  body  all  the 
family  of  the  first-born  in  heaven  and  earth,  even  in  Him. 
This  Paul  has  told  us  would  be  in  '  the  fulness  of  time.' — 
Eph.  1 :  9;  10. 


HIS   POSITION.  255 

11  The  time,  as  I  have  calculated  it,  is  now  filled  up,  and 
I  expect  every  moment  to  see  the  Saviour  descend  from 
heaven.  I  have  now  nothing  to  look  for  but  this  glorious 
hope.  I  am  full  in  the  faith  that  all  prophetic  chronology, 
excepting  the  thousand  years  of  Rev.  20th,  is  now  about 
full.  Whether  God  designs  for  me  to  warn  the  people  of 
this  earth  any  more,  or  not,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  know.  Should 
time  continue  longer  than  I  have  expected,  I  mean  to  be 
governed  by  the  providence  of  Him  who  will  never  err,  in 
wThom  I  think  I  have  trusted,  and  have  been  supported  by. 
during  my  twelve  years  of  arduous  labors,  in  endeavoring  to 
awaken  the  churches  of  God  and  the  Christian  community, 
and  to  warn  my  fellow-men  of  the  necessity  of  an  immediate 
preparation  to  meet  our  Judge,  in  the  day  of  his  appearing. 
I  hope  that  I  have  cleansed  my  garments  of  the  blood  of 
souls.  I  feel  that,  as  far  as  it  was  in  my  power,  I  have 
freed  myself  from  all  guilt  in  their  condemnation 

"  I  feel  almost  confident  that  my  labors  are  about  done; 
and  I  am,  with  a  deep  interest  of  soul,  looking  for  my 
blessed  and  glorious  Redeemer,  who  will  be  king  over  all 
the  earth,  and  God  with  us  forevermore.  This,  I  can 
truly  say,  is  my  chief  desire.  It  is  my  meditation  all  the 
day  long.  It  is  my  song  in  the  night.  It  is  my  faith  and 
hope.  It  consoles  me  in  sickness,  comforts  me  in  tribula- 
tion, and  gives  me  patience  to  endure  the  scoffs  and  taunts 
of  the  selfish  and  ungodly.  My  faith  and  confidence  in 
God's  word  are  as  strong  as  ever,  although  Christ  has  not 
come  in  the  time  I  expected.  I  still  believe  that  the  time  is 
not  far  off,  and  that  God  will  soon  —  yes,  too  soon  for  the 
proud  and  scoffing  — justify  himself,  his  word,  and  the  cry 
which  has  been  given. 

"  This  is  the  position  I  have  now  to  take,  and  wThat  more 
work  I  have  to  do  will  be  done  in  this  manner.     I  will 

11  1.  Prove  by  Scripture  and  history  that  the  time  is 
fulfilled. 

"  2.  Show  the  signs  completed:  and, 

"  3.  Present  the  duty  of  watching;  for  'we  know  not 
what  hour  the  Lord  may  come.' 

"  If  God  has  anything  more  for  me  to  do  in  his  vineyard, 
he  will  give  me  strength,  open  the  door,  and  enable  me  to 
do  whatever  may  be  his  will,  for  his  glory,  and  for  the  best 


256  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

good  of  men.  To  Him  I  leave  the  event.  For  Him  I 
watch  and  pray :  Come,  Lord  Jesus,  come  quickly.  Amen  ! 
Even  so  come,  Lord  Jesus.  William  Miller." 

On  the  2d  of  May  he  wrote  as  follows  : 

"  TO    SECOND   ADVENT  BELIEVERS. 

"  Were  I  to  live  my  life  over  again,  with  the  same 
evidence  that  I  then  had,  to  be  honest  with  God  and  man  I 
should  have  to  do  as  I  have  done.  Although  opposers  said 
it  would  not  come,  they  produced  no  weighty  arguments. 
It  was  evidently  guess-work  with  them  ;  and  I  then  thought, 
and  do  now,  that  their  denial  was  based  more  on  an  un- 
willingness for  the  Lord  to  come  than  on  any  arguments 
leading  to  such  a  conclusion. 

"I  confess  my  error,  and  acknowledge  my  disappoint* 
merit ;  yet  I  still  believe  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  near, 
even  at  the  door ;  and  I  exhort  you,  my  brethren,  to  be 
watchful,  and  not  let  that  day  come  upon  you  unawares. 
The  wicked,  the  proud,  and  the  bigot,  will  exult  over  us.  I 
will  try  to  be  patient.  God  will  deliver  the  godly  out  of 
temptation,  and  will  reserve  the  unjust  to  be  punished  at 
Christ's  appearing. 

"  I  want  you,  my  brethren,  not  to  be  drawn  away  from 
the  truth.  Do  not,  I  pray  you,  neglect  the  Scriptures. 
They  are  able  to  make  you  wise  unto  eternal  life.  Let  us 
be  careful  not  to  be  drawn  away  from  the  manner  and  object 
of  Christ's  coming ;  for  the  next  attack  of  the  adversary 
will  be  to  induce  unbelief  respecting  these.  The  manner  of 
Christ's  coming  has  been  well  discussed.  Permit  me,  then, 
to  address  you  on  the  subject  of 

"the  burning  day. 

"  '  This  second  epistle,  beloved,  I  now  write  unto  you,  in  both  which 
I  stir  up  your  pure  minds  by  way  of  remembrance  ;  that  ye  may  be 
mindful  of  the  words  which  were  spoken  before  by  the  holy  prophets, 
and  of  the  commandment  of  us,  the  apostles  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  : 
knowing  this  first,  that  there  shall  come  in  the  last  days  scoffers,  walking 
after  their  own  lusts,  and  saying,  Where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming  ? 
for  since  the  fathers  fell  asleep,  all  things  continue  as  they  were  from  the 
beginning  of  the  creation.  For  this  they  willingly  are  ignorant  of,  that 
by  the  word  of  God  the  heavens  were  of  old,  and  the  earth  standing  out 
of  the  water  and  in  the  water  ;  whereby  the  world  that  then  was,  being 


THE   BURNING   DAY.  257 

overflowed  with  water,  perished  :  but  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  which 
are  now,  by  the  same  word  are  kept  in  store,  reserved  unto  fire  against 
the  day  of  judgment  and  perdition  of  ungodly  men.' — 2  Pet.  3  :  1 — 7. 

"  This  is  an  important  subject;  and,  on  reading  it,  a 
number  of  important  queries  naturally  arise. 

' '  I.  How  are  we  to  understand  this  ? 

"  II.  What  are  we  to  believe  will  be  done  xohen  this 
takes  place  ? 

11  III.  When  will  it  take  place  ;  at  the  commencement 
or  end  of  the  one  thousand  years''  reign  spoken  of  in 
Rev.  20  :  6  ? 

"  I.  This  passage  must  be  understood  literally.  1st. 
Because  there  is  nothing  in  the  passage  to  warrant  a  figura- 
tive meaning.  2d.  It  is  compared  to  the  deluge  ;  and  it  is 
universally  acknowledged  that  the  antediluvians  perished  by 
water.  And  3d.  In  no  place  where,  this  burning  day  is 
spoken  of  in  Scripture,  is  it  explained  to  mean  a  figure. 
Therefore,  I  cannot  but  believe  that  the  earth  will  be  over- 
whelmed in  literal  fire. 

"  II.  What  is  to  be  done  when  this  burning  takes 
place  ?  1st.  Christ  comes  in  power  and  great  glory.  2d. 
He  takes  vengeance  on  the  wicked,  consumes  their  bodies  to 
ashes,  melts  the  elements  with  fervent  heat,  and  burns  up  or 
dissolves  the  works  of  men.  3d.  The  present  governments 
of  earth  and  the  present  dispensation  of  God's  grace  will 
pass  away,  and  the  new  heavens  and  new  earth  succeed, 
wherein  the  righteous  shall  dwell  forever. 

"  Those  are  the  prominent  events  to  take  place  at  the 
consummation  spoken  of  in  the  word  of  God.  Proof:  '  But 
the  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief  in  the  night ;  in 
the  which  the  heavens  shall .  pass  away  with  a  great  noise, 
and  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat,  the  earth  also 
and  the  works  that  are  therein  shall  be  burned  up.  Seeing, 
then,  that  all  these  things  shall  be  dissolved,  what  manner 
of  persons  ought  ye  to  be  in  all  holy  conversation  and  god- 
liness, looking  for  and  hasting  unto  the  coming  of  the  day 
of  God,  wherein  the  heavens  being  on  fire  shall  be  dissolved, 
and  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat !  Neverthe- 
less, we,  according  to  his  promise,  look  for  new  heavens  and 
a  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness.'  —  2  Peter  3  : 
10 — 13.     The  coming  of  Christ  is  here  spoken  of,  the  pass- 


258  LIFE    OF  WILLIAM   MILLEK. 

ing  away  of  the  heavens,  the  melting  of  the  elements,  the 
burning  up  of  the  works  of  men,  and  the  new  heavens  and 
new  earth,  as  promised. 

"  Where  is  that  promise  ?  Some  say  it  is  in  Isa.  65 :  17. 
But  that  cannot  be  the  original  promise  to  which  Peter 
alludes  ;  it  can  only  be  a  repetition  of  the  promise  to  our 
fathers.  '  For  the  promise  that  he  should  be  the  heir  of  the 
world  wTas  not  to  Abraham,  or  to  his  seed,  through  the  law, 
but  through  the  righteousness  of  faith.  For  if  they  which 
are  of  the  law  be  heirs,  faith  is  made  void,  and  the  promise 
made  of  none  effect.  Because  the  law  worketh  wrath  ;  for 
where  no  law  is,  there  is  no  transgression.  Therefore  it  is 
of  faith,  that  it  might  be  by  grace  ;  to  the  end  the  promise 
might  be  sure  to  all  the  seed ;  not  to  that  only  which  is  of 
the  law,  but  to  that  also  which  is  of  the  faith  of  Abraham, 
who  is  the  father  of  us  all.'  —  Rom.  4  :  13—16.  <  For  if 
the  inheritance  be  of  the  law,  it  is  no  more  of  promise ;  but 
God  gave  it  to  Abraham  by  promise.  .  .  .  And  if  ye  be 
Christ's,  then  are  ye  Abraham's  seed,  and  heirs  according 
to  the  promise.'  —  Gal.  3:  18,  29.  'For  it  is  written, 
Rejoice,  thou  barren  that  bearest  not ;  break  forth  and  cry, 
thou  that  travailest  not ;  for  the  desolate  hath  many  more 
children  than  she  which  hath  an  husband.'  —  Gal.  4  :  27. 
Here  Paul  quotes  Isa.  54  :  1,  and  tells  us  it  was  written  by 
him  ;  but  Isaiah  evidently  refers  us  to  Abraham's  day,  and 
alludes  to  the  history  of  Ishmael  and  Isaac,  as  Paul  does 
in  Gal.  4  :  22—30. 

"  Peter  says:  'Wherein  dwelleth  righteousness,'  or 
righteous  persons.  This  promise  Abraham  saw  afar  off. 
Not  the  promise  that  Abraham  and  his  seed  should  inherit 
the  literal  land  of  Canaan ;  for  that  promise  was  fulfilled. 
'  And  the  Lord  gave  unto  Israel  all  the  land  which  he  sware 
to  give  unto  their  fathers  ;  and  they  possessed  it,  and  dwelt 
therein.  And  the  Lord  gave  them  rest  round  about,  accord- 
ing to  all  that  he  sware  unto  their  fathers ;  and  there  stood 
not  a  man  of  all  their  enemies  before  them  :  the  Lord  deliv- 
ered all  their  enemies  into  their  hand.  There  failed  not 
aught  of  any  good  thing  which  the  Lord  had  spoken  unto 
the  house  of  Israel;  all  came  to  pass.'  —  Josh.  21  :  43 — 
45.     It  was  a  promise  that  he  should  be  heir  of  the  new 


THE   BURNING   DAY.  259 

earth  where  the  children  of  the  bond  woman,  of  the  earth 
earthy,  would  be  cast  out. 

"  If  the  old  land  of  Canaan  is  the  inheritance,  then  the 
old  city  of  Jerusalem  must  be  the  sanctuary,  and  the  old 
Jews  must  be  the  heirs,  and  nothing  is  true  but  Judaism. 
But  Isaiah  says  :  '  The  former  things  shall  not  be  remem- 
bered, nor  come  into  mind.'  This  doctrine  of  the  old  land 
of  Canaan  being  the  inheritance  of  the  saints,  and  the 
wicked  dwelling  on  the  remainder  of  the  earth,  making  carnal 
war  with  Christ  and  his  immortal  saints  on  the  land  of  Ca- 
naan, and  the  cleansing  of  the  earth  by  fire,  after  the  saints 
and  Christ  have  possessed  it  a  thousand  years,  to  me,  at  least, 
is  neither  Scripture  nor  common  sense.  I  will,  therefore, 
show, 

"  III.  That  the  cleansing  of  the  earth  by  fire  will  be 
when  Christ  comes.  '  Our  God  shall  come,  and  shall  not 
keep  silence  :  a  fire  shall  devour  before  him,  and  it  shall  be 
very  tempestuous  round  about  him.  He  shall  call  to  the 
heavens  from  above,  and  to  the  earth,  that  he  may  judge  his 
people.  Gather  my  saints  together  unto  me  ;  those  that 
have  made  a  covenant  with  me  by  sacrifice.'  —  Psa.  50:  3 — 
5.  In  this  passage  the  fire  devours  i  before  him.'  He  also 
gathers  and  judges  his  people.  Verse  6th  declares  Peter's 
new  heavens  and  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness. 

u  '  A  fire  goeth  before  him,  and  burneth  up  his  enemies 
round  about.  His  lightnings  enlightened  the  world ;  the 
earth  saw,  and  trembled.  The  hills  melted  like  wax  at  the 
presence  of  the  Lord,  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord  of  the 
whole  earth.  The  heavens  declare  his  righteousness,  and 
all  the  people  see  his  glory.'  —  Psa.  97  :  3 — 6.  Here,  as 
in  the  last  quotation,  the  fire  goeth  before  him,  burns  up  his 
enemies,  the  earth  trembles,  the  hills  melt,  there  is  the  new 
heavens,  and  all  the  people  left  see  his  glorious  reign. 

"  '  A  fiery  stream  issued  and  came  forth  f$>m  before  him; 
thousand  thousands  ministered  unto  him,  and  ten  thousand 
times  ten  thousand  stood  before  him;  the  judgment  was  set, 
and  the  books  were  opened.  I  beheld  then,  because  of  the 
voice  of  the  great  words  which  the  horn  spake  :  I  beheld 
even  till  the  beast  wTas  slain,  and  his  body  destroyed,  and 
given  to  the  burning  flames.'  —  Dan.  7:10,  11.  The  fire 
goes  before  him ;  the  body  of  the  fourth  kingdom,  which 
23 


260  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

treads  down  the  sanctuary,  the  whole  earth  (see  verse  23d), 
is  destroyed,  and  given  to  the  burning  flame. 

"  '  For  behold,  the  Lord  will  come  with  fire,  and  with  his 
chariots  like  a  whirlwind,  to  render  his  anger  with  fury,  and 
his  rebuke  with  flames  of  fire.  For  by  fire  and  by  his  sword 
will  the  Lord  plead  with  all  flesh  ;  and  the  slain  of  the  Lord 
shall  be  many.  They  that  sanctify  themselves,  and  purify 
themselves  in  the  gardens  behind  one  tree  in  the  midst,  eat- 
ing swine's  flesh,  and  the  abomination,  and  the  mouse,  shall 
be  consumed  together,  saith  the  Lord.  For  I  know  their 
works  and  their  thoughts  :  it  shall  come,  that  I  will  gather 
all  nations  and  tongues  :  and  they  shall  come  and  see  my 
glory.'  —  Isa.  66  :  15 — 18.  God  came  from  Teman.  and 
the  Holy  One  from  Mount  Paran.  His  glory  covered  the 
heavens,  and  the  earth  was  full  of  his  praise.  And  his 
brightness  was  as  the  light ;  he  had  horns  coming  out  of  his 
hand  :  and  there  was  the  hiding  of  his  power.  Before  him 
went  the  pestilence,  and  burning  coals  went  forth  at  his  feet. 
He  stood,  and  measured  the  earth ;  he  beheld,  and  drove 
asunder  the  nations ;  and  the  everlasting  mountains  were 
scattered,  the  perpetual  hills  did  bow  :  his  ways  are  ever- 
lasting.'—  Hab.  3:  3 — 6.  These  passages  all  harmonize, 
'  For  behold,  the  day  cometh,  that  shall  burn  as  an  oven  : 
and  all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all  that  do  wickedly,  shall  be 
stubble  :  and  the  day  that  cometh  shall  burn  them  up,  saith 
the  Lord  of  hosts,  that  it  shall  leave  them  neither  root  nor 
branch.  But  unto  you  that  fear  my  name  shall  the  Sun 
of  righteousness  arise  with  healing  in  his  wings :  and  ye 
shall  go  forth,  and  grow  up  as  calves  of  the  stall.  And  ye 
shall  tread  down  the  wicked  :  for  they  shall  be  ashes  under 
the  soles  of  your  feet  in  the  day  that  I  shall  do  this,  saith 
the  Lord  of  hosts.' —  Mai.  4:  1—3.  This  text  plainly 
proves  that  the  burning  day  is  when  Christ  makes  up  his 
jewels,  when  he  separates  the  sheep  from  the  goats,  and  we 
discern  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  :  also,  that  all 
the  proud  and  all  that  do  wickedly  are  burned  up,  and  that 
they  are  ashes  in  that  day.  How  can  this  be  if  the  earth  is 
not  destroyed  by  fire  until  the  thousand  years  are  fulfilled  ? 
'  For  the  wicked  live  not  again  until  the  thousand  years  are 
finished.'  — Rev.  20:  5. 

"  Again  :  See  Matt.  3  :  12  :   '  Whose  fan  is  in  his  hand, 


THE   BURNING   DAY.  261 

and  he  will  thoroughly  purge  his  floor,  and  gather  his  wheat 
into  the  garner ;  but  he  will  burn  up  the  chaff  with  un- 
quenchable fire.'  '  The  Son  of  Man  shall  send  forth  his 
angels,  and  they  shall  gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all  things 
that  offend,  and  them  which  do  iniquity ;  and  shall  cast  them 
into  a  furnace  of  fire  ;  there  shall  be  wailing  and  gnashing 
of  teeth.  Then  shall  the  righteous  shine  forth  as  the  sun 
in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father.  Who  hath  ears  to  hear,  let 
him  hear.' — lb.,  13  :  41 — 43.  Here  we  have  the  explana- 
tion of  Christ  himself.  At  his  coming  he  gathers  out  of  the 
kingdom  (the  territory  or  world)  all  that  offend  or  do 
iniquity,  after  wrhich  the  righteous  shine  forth  in  the  king- 
dom —  the  world  cleansed,  wherein  dwelleth  righteous  per- 
sons. 

u  John  said  :  {  I  indeed  baptize  you  with  water  ;  but  one 
mightier  than  I  cometh,  the  latchet  of  whose  shoes  I  am  not 
worthy  to  unloose  :  he  shall  baptize  you  with  the  Holy 
Ghost  and  with  fire ;  whose  fan  is  in  his  hand,  and  he  will 
thoroughly  purge  his  floor,  and  will  gather  the  wTheat  into 
his  garner ;  but  the  chaff  he  will  burn  with  fire  unquench- 
able.'—  Luke  3  :  16,  17.  We  may  safely  conclude,  by  this 
passage,  that  Christ,  at  his  second  coming,  will  immerse  the 
world  in  fire,  and  at  the  same  time  gather  his  wheat  into  his 
garner.  *  But  the  same  day  that  Lot  went  out  of  Sodom,  it 
rained  fire  and  brimstone  from  heaven,  and  destroyed  them 
all :  even  thus  shall  it  be  in  the  day  when  the  Son  of  Man 
is  revealed.'  —  Luke  17  :  29,  30.  This  text  is  plain,  and 
shows  that,  the  same  day  the  Son  of  Man  is  revealed,  he 
will  destroy,  by  fire  from  heaven,  all  the  wicked.  i  And  to 
you,  who  are  troubled,  rest  wTith  us,  when  the  Lord  Jesus 
shall  be  revealed  from  heaven  with  his  mighty  angels,  in 
flaming  fire,  taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God, 
and  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  who 
shall  be  punished  with  everlasting  destruction  from  the 
presence  of  the  Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of  his  power ;  when 
he  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  to  be  admired 
in  all  them  that  believe  (because  our  testimony  among  you 
was  believed),  in  that  day.'  —  2  Thess.  1  :  7 — 10.  '  And 
then  shall  that  Wicked  be  revealed,  whom  the  Lord  shall 
consume  with  the  spirit  of  his  mouth,  and  shall  destroy  with 
the  brightness  of  his  coming.' — lb.,  2  :  8.     How  any  one 


262  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

can  think  to  harmonize  the  Scriptures,  and  not  have  the 
world  purified  by  fire  at  the  coming  of  Christ.  I  cannot  con- 
ceive. 

"  'Wait  on  the  Lord,  and  keep  his  way,  and  he  shall 
exalt  thee  to  inherit  the  land ;  when  the  wicked  are  cut  off, 
thou  shalt  see  it.'  —  Psa.  87  :  34. 

"And  now,  my  brethren,  I  exhort  you  not  to  be  led 
away  from  plain  fundamental  truths.  Now  is  the  time  of 
danger.  Satan  has  come  down,  having  great  power,  know- 
ing he  hath  but  a  short  time.  '  Behold,  I  come  quickly  : 
hold  that  fast  which  thou  hast,  that  no  man  take  thy  crown.' 
—  Rev.  3:  11. 

"Low  Hampton,  May  2,  1844." 

Shortly  after  this  he  wrote  the  following  lines  respecting 
his  disappointment : 

"  How  tedious  and  lonesome  the  hours, 
While  Jesus,  my  Saviour,  delays  ! 
I  have  sought  him  in  solitude's  bowers, 
And  looked  for  him  all  the  long  days. 

Yet  he  lingers  —  I  pray  tell  me  why 

His  chariot  no  sooner  returns  ? 
To  see  him  in  clouds  of  the  sky, 

My  soul  with  intensity  burns. 

I  long  to  be  with  him  at  home, 

My  heart  swallowed  up  in  his  love, 
On  the  fields  of  New  Eden  to  roam, 

And  to  dwell  with  my  Saviour  above." 

During  the  last  week  of  May,  the  Annual  Conference  of 
Adventists  was  held  in  the  Tabernacle  at  Boston.  Mr, 
Miller  was  present,  and.  at  the  close  of  one  of  the  meetings, 
in  accordance  with  a  previous  notice,  arose,  and  frankly  con- 
fessed his  mistake  in  the  definite  time  at  which  he  supposed 
the  prophetic  periods  would  have  terminated.  The  following 
notice  of  this  confession,  written  by  a  hearer,  appeared  in 
the  Boston  Post  on  the  1st  of  June  following : 

"Father  Miller's  Confession. —  Many  people  were 
desirous  of  hearing  what  was  termed  Father  Miller's  Con- 
fession, which,  according  to  rumor,  was  to  be  delivered  at  the 
Tabernacle  on  Tuesday  evening  last,  when  and  where  a  large 
concourse  assembled,  myself  among  the  number,  to  hear  the 
1  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter  :'  and  I  confess  I  was  well 


HIS   CONFESSION.  263 

paid  for  my  time  and  trouble.  I  should  judge,  also,  by  the 
appearance  of  the  audience,  and  the  remarks  I  heard  from 
one  or  two  gentlemen  not  of  Mr.  Miller's  faith,  that  a  general 
satisfaction  was  felt.  I  never  heard  hirn  when  he  was  more 
eloquent  or  animated,  or  more  happy  in  communicating  his 
feelings  and  sentiments  to  others.  Want  of  time  and  space 
will  not  permit  me  to  give  even  a  mere  sketch  of  his  remarks, 
which  occupied  more  than  an  hour.  He  confessed  that  he 
had  been  disappointed,  but  by  no  means  discouraged  or 
shaken  in  his  faith  in  God's  goodness,  or  in  the  entire  fulfil- 
ment of  his  word,  or  in  the  speedy  coming  of  our  Saviour,  and 
the  destruction  of  the  world.  Although  the  supposed  time 
had  passed,  God's  time  had  not  passed.  l  If  the  vision  tarry, 
wait  for  it.'  He  remained  firm  in  the  belief  that  the  end 
of  all  things  is  at  hand,  even  at  the  door.  He  spoke  with 
much  feeling  and  effect,  and  left  no  doubt  of  his  sincerity. 

D." 

His  disappointment  in  the  passing  of  the  time  was  great ; 
but  it  did  not  at  all  impair  his  confidence  in  God,  or  affect 
his  usual  cheerfulness  of  disposition.  Elder  Josiah  Litch, 
who  visited  him  on  the  8th  of  June,  at  Low  Hampton,  thus 
wrote  : 

"  I  found  both  himself  and  family  well  and  in  fine  spirits. 
Indeed,  I  have  never  seen  him  when  he  seemed  to  enjoy  him- 
self better  than  at  present.  If  any  evidence  of  his  sincerity 
in  preaching  the  Advent  of  Christ  in  1843  were  wanting,  in 
addition  to  his  arduous  and  unrequited  toil  of  twelve  years, 
his  present  humble  submission  to  his  disappointment,  and  the 
spirit  of  meekness  with  which  the  confession  of  disappoint- 
ment is  made,  is  sufficient  to  satisfy  the  most  incredulous 
that  nothing  but  a  deep  conviction  of  duty  to  God  and  man 
could  have  moved  such  a  man  to  such  a  work.  That  he  is 
greatly  disappointed  in  not  seeing  the  Lord  within  the  ex- 
pected time,  must  be  evident  to  all  who  hear  him  speak ; 
while  the  tearful  eye  and  subdued  voice  show  from  whence 
flow  the  words  he  utters. 

"  Although  disappointed  as  to  time,  I  never  saw  him  more 
strong  than  now  in  the  general  correctness  of  his  expositions 
of  Scripture  and  calculation  of  prophetic  times,  and  in  the 
faith  of  our  Lord's  speedy  coming." 
23* 


264  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

In  company  with  his  son  George  and  Mr.  Himes,  Mr. 
Miller  left  home  on  the  21st  of  July.  1844,  for  a  tour  as  far 
west  as  Cincinnati.  They  reached  Rochester.  N.  Y.,  on  the 
23d,  and  on  the  24th  commenced  a  series  of  meetings  in  a 
beautiful  grove  in  Scottsville,  near  that  city.  Mr.  Miller  was 
listened  to  with  unusual  interest. 

From  Rochester  they  visited  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  Toronto, 
C.  W.j  Lockport,  N.  Y.,  Cleveland,  Akron,  Cincinnati,  and 
other  places  in  Ohio.  At  this  last  place  he  lectured,  on  the 
evening  of  August  19th,  to  an  audience  of  about  four  thou- 
sand persons,  and  continued  there  one  week. 

They  had  proposed  going  further  west,  but  freshets  in  the 
rivers  in  those  parts  prevented.  They  returned  from  Cin- 
cinnati, up  the  Ohio  and  Muskingum  rivers,  to  McConnells- 
ville,  which  they  reached  on  the  28th  of  August,  and  where 
Mr.  M.  delivered  five  lectures. 

On  the  2d  of  September  they  left  this  place  by  steamboat, 
down  the  Muskingum  river  to  Marietta,  from  thence  to  take 
a  boat  to  Pittsburg,  on  their  way  to  Philadelphia.  On  board 
the  boat  for  Marietta  they  found  from  thirty  to  forty  Metho- 
dist ministers,  who  were  on  their  way  to  attend  the  Metho- 
dist Episcopal  Conference  in  that  city. 

Mr.  M.  noticed  some  sly  glances  from  one  to  another, 
which  seemed  to  say,  "  We  will  have  some  sport  with  the 
old  gentleman."  He,  however,  took  no  notice  of  them,  but 
went  to  a  retired  part  of ^  the  deck,  and  commenced  reading. 
Soon  a  dandy-looking  minister  walked  past  him  several  times, 
and  finally  asked  him  : 

"  Is  your  name  Miller  ?  " 

Mr.  M.  replied  in  the  affirmative,  and  kept  on  reading. 

He  then  asked  him  if  he  was  the  Miller  who  had  proph- 
esied the  end  of  the  world. 

Mr.  M.  said  he  did  not  prophesy,  but  supposed  that  he 
was  the  one  to  whom  he  referred. 

The  minister  said  that  he  did  not  believe  we  could  know 
when  the  world  was  to  end. 

Mr.  M.j  thinking  he  had  a  right  to  his  unbelief,  made  no 
reply. 

The  minister  then  said  he  did  not  believe  God  had  re- 
vealed the  time. 

Mr.  M.  replied,  that  he  could  prove  by  the  Bible  that  God 


INTERVIEW   WITH   METHODIST  MINISTERS.  265 

had  revealed  it ;  and  that,  if  he  was  an  honest  man,  he  would 
make  him  acknowledge  it,  by  asking  him  a  few  questions  in 
reference  to  the  Bible,  if  he  would  answer  them. 

The  man  retired,  procured  his  Bible,  and  returned  with 
about  twenty  other  ministers,  who  gathered  around  him.  An 
elderly  one.  who  looked  like  an  honest  man,  took  his  seat  in 
front,  on  the  capstan.  All  were  attention.  Mr.  M.  asked 
the  man  to  read  the  first  three  verses  of  Dan.  12th. 

This  he  did  aloud. 

Mr.  M.  then  asked  if  the  resurrection  was  brought  to 
view  in  those  verses. 

The  man  looked  at  them  for  a  while,  and  said  he  did  not 
know  that  it  was. 

Mr.  M.  asked  him  if  he  would  tell  what  they  did  mean. 

He  said  he  did  not  choose  to  do  so. 

"0!  very  well,"  said  Mr.  M,  ;  "we  have  nothing 
more  to  say  together ;  for  I  did  not  agree  to  convince  you, 
if  you  would  not  answer  a  few  questions." 

The  elderly  minister  then  asked  him  why  he  would  not 
answer. 

"  Because  I  do  not  choose  to  do  so." 

"Why,"  said  the  old  gentleman,  "  I  should  have  no 
objection  to  answering  that  question.  It  does  refer  to  the 
resurrection." 

"Well,  father,"  said  Mr.  M.,  "I  perceive  you  are  an 
honest  man.    I  will,  if  you  please,  ask  you  a  few  questions." 

The  old  gentleman  said  he  w^ould  answer  them  if  he  could. 

Mr.  M.  asked  him  to  read  the  6th  verse  —  '-  How  long 
shall  it  be  to  the  end  of  these  wonders  ?  " — and  say  what 
wonders  were  referred  to. 

The  dandy  minister  then 'spoke  —  "Don't  answer  that 
question;  he  will  make  a  Miller  it  e  of  you." 

The  elderly  minister  said  he  was  not  afraid  of  the  Bible, 
let  it  make  what  it  would  of  him ;  and  replied,  that  the 
"  wonders  "  referred  to  must  mean  the  resurrection.  &c. 

"  Well,"  said  Mr.  M.,  "  is  the  reply  of  the  one  clothed 
in  linen,  who  sware  'that  it  should  be  for  a  time,  times,  and 
an  half,'  given  in  answer  to  the  question,  how  long  it  will 
be  to  the  resurrection  1 " 

Here  the  dandy  minister  again  spoke  —  "  Don't  answer 
that  question ;  for,  if  you  do,  he  will  make  a  Miller  it  e  of  you." 


266  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

The  other  gave  hint  to  understand  that  he  "was  afraid  of 
no  result  to  which  an  honest  investigation  of  the  Scriptures 
might  lead,  and  that  he  should  answer  any  questions  he  chose 
to.  The  admission  of  the  dandy  minister,  that  honest  an- 
swers could  not  be  given  to  a  few  simple  questions  on  a 
portion  of  Scripture,  without  making  men  "  Millerites," 
excited  the  interest  of  all  to  the  highest  point. 

The  elderly  minister  replied,  that  he  thought  it  must  be 
given  in  answer  to  that  question. 

On  hearing  the  answer,  the  dandy  minister  shrunk  back, 
closed  his  mouth,  and  interfered  no  more. 

Mr.  M.  asked  who  it  was  that  gave  this  answer. 

The  other  readily  replied,  that  he  was  undoubtedly  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

•'Well,  then,"  said  Mr.  M.,  "if  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
in  answer  to  the  question,  How  long  it  should  be  to  the  res- 
urrection, has  sworn  with  an  oath  that  it  shall  be  for  a  time, 
times,  and  an  half,  is  not  the  time  revealed  ?" 

"  But,'"  said  the  other,  ;*  you  can't  tell  what  that  time, 
times  and  an  half  mean  ) " ; 

"I  did  not  agree."'  said  Mr.  M.,  "to  do  that;  our 
understanding  of  it  is  another  thing.  But  has  not  God 
there  revealed  the  time,  and  sworn  to  it  with  an  oath  ? " 

"  Yes.*'   said  the  other.    "  he  has/' 

"Well,  then,"  said  Mr.  M.,  "I  have  proved  all  I 
agreed  to.'" 

"Why,"  said  the  minister,  "I  never  saw  this  in  this 
light  before.  Can  vou  tell  what  is  meant  by  time,  times  and 
an  half? ;; 

Mr,  M.  i:  I  will  try.  Read,  if  vou  please,  the  6th  verse 
of  Rev.  12." 

Min.  '''  "And  the  woman  fled  into  the  wilderness,  where 
she  hath  a  place  prepared  of  God,  that  they  should  feed  her 
there  a  thousand  two  hundred  and  three-score  days.' ' 

Mr.  M.     "  Now  read  the  14th  verse.*' 

Min.  "  'And  to  the  woman  were  given  two  wings  of  a 
great  eagle,  that  she  might  fly  into  the  wilderness,  into  her 
place,  where  she  is  nourished  for  a  time  and  times  and  half  a 
time.'  " 

Mr.  M.  "  Do  not  those  two  denote  the  same  period  of 
time  ?  ' " 

Min.  "Yes." 


INTERVIEW   WITH   METHODIST   MINISTERS.  267 

Mr.  M.  "  Then  must  not  the  time  given  in  answer  to 
the  question  be  the  same  as  the  1260  days  7  " 

The  minister  acknowledged  it  must  be  so. 

Mr.  M.  pointed  him  to  the  various  places  where  the  same 
period  is  presented  under  different  forms, — forty-two 
months,  1260  days,  time,  times  and  half  a  time, —  and  showed 
him  how  30  days  to  a  month,  and  12  months  to  a  year, 
would  make  3|  years,  equal  to  1260  days.  He  then 
asked  him  if  we  might  not  know  that  God  had  revealed  the 
time  to  the  resurrection  in  days. 

He  said,  yes ;  but  asked  if  we  could  know  how  to  reckon 
them. 

Mr.  M.  pointed  him  to  Dan.  7 :  25,  the  time  of  the  con- 
tinuance of  the  saints  in  the  hands  of  the  Little  Horn,  a 
period  of  the  same  length,  and  asked  if  that  could  denote 
simply  1260  days;  "  for,"  said  he,  ■"  you  know  that  they 
persecuted  the  saints  more  than  so  many  literal  days." 

This  he  admitted ;  but  asked,  if  not  literal  days,  what 
they  were. 

Mr.  M.  showed  him  that  the  language  was  symbolical ; 
that  if  it  had  been  given  in  literal  time,  it  would  have  had  a 
bad  effect  on  past  generations,  as  they  would  have  seen  that 
the  judgment  could  not  come  in  their  day,  and  they  might 
not  have  lived  in  continual  readiness  for  it,  as  they  should  do. 
He  then  referred  him  to  Numb.  14  :  34  and  Ezek.  4  :  6, 
where  God  has  appointed  a  day  for  a  year ;  showed  him  how 
the  70  weeks  were  fulfilled  in  490  years, —  as  many  years 
as  there  were  days  in  70  weeks, —  and  showed  there  were  just 
1260  years  from  the  time  the  decree  of  Justinian  went  into 
effect,  A.  d.  538,  to  1798,  when  the  Papacy  was  subverted 
by  Napoleon. 

The  minister  acknowledged  the  pertinency  of  these  refer- 
ences, and  confessed  that  the  time  sworn  to  by  Christ  must 
denote  1260  years. 

Mr.  M.  then  showed  how  the  2300  days  and  the  four  great 
kingdoms,  &c,  bring  us  down  to  the  end,  and  how  they 
must  terminate  about  this  time ;  but  confessed  that  the  ex- 
pected time  had  gone  by.  He  spoke  about  an  hour,  during 
which  the  strictest  attention  was  given  by  those  who  stood 
around.  Many  confessed  they  never  thought  that  "  Mil- 
lerism  "  was  anything  like  that. 


268  LIFE   OP  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

On  arriving  at  Marietta,  Mr.  M.  was  detained  a  part  of 
the  next  day  in  the  boat,  and  the  inhabitants  came  down 
with  the  request  that  he  would  stop  and  lecture,  offering  him 
the  Methodist  house.  But  he  was  obliged  to  hasten  on,  and 
could  not  comply  with  their  invitation. 

They  arrived  at  Harrisburg,  Pa,,  on  Sunday  the  8th,  and 
lectured  four  days  in  the  old  Methodist  chapel,  to  good  au- 
diences. They  then  passed  on  to  Middletow7n,  where  they 
remained  two  days  ;  to  Sandersville,  where  Mr.  M.  gave  one 
lecture  ;  and  to  Philadelphia,  where  they  arrived  on  the  14th 
of  September.  On  the  16th,  Mr.  M.  commenced  his  lec- 
tures at  the  Museum  Saloon,  in  Julian  street. 

On  the  19th,  Mr.  M.  reached  New  York  city,  and  the 
next  day  gave  a  discourse  in  Franklin  Hall.  On  Sunday, 
p.  m.,  he  preached  in  the  church  in  Chrystie  street,  from 
these  words  :  "  But  this  I  confess  unto  thee,  that  after  the 
way  which  they  call  heresy,  so  worship  I  the  God  of  my 
fathers,  believing  all  things  that  are  written  in  the  law  and 
the  prophets ;  and  have  hope  towards  God,  which  they  them- 
selves also  allow,  that  there  shall  be  a  resurrection  of  the 
dead,  both  of  the  just  and  unjust." —  Acts  24  :  14, 15.  He 
spoke  with  great  ease  and  clearness  respecting  the  reasons 
which  had  fixed  his  mind  on  1843.  He  acknowledged  that 
there  had  been  a  mistake,  but  expressed  his  assurance  in  the 
near  coming  of  Christ,  for  which  event  he  entreated  all  to 
be  in  readiness.  In  the  evening,  he  spoke  in  the  same  place, 
to  a  crowded  and  attentive  audience,  upon  the  seven  last 
plagues  of  Rev.  16  :  15 — 17, —  six  of  which  he  believed  had 
been  poured  out  during  the  last  three  hundred  years. 

His  health  was  at  this  time  suffering  considerably  from 
the  fatigues  of  the  western  tour  ;  and,  feeling  it  his  duty  to 
rest  for  a  season,  he  declined  the  many  urgent  invitations 
which  were  then  pressing  upon  him  for  lectures  elsewhere, 
and  returned  to  his  family  at  Low  Hampton.  From  that 
place  he  wrote  as  follows  : 

«  September  30,  1844. 

"  Dear  Brother  :  —  I  am  once  more  at  home,  worn  down 
with  the  fatigue  of  my  journey,  my  strength  so  exhausted  and 
my  bodily  infirmities  so  great,  that  I  am  about  concluding  I 
shall  never  be  able  again  to  labor  in  the  vineyard  as  hereto- 
fore.    I  wish  now  to  remember  with  gratitude  all  those  who 


THE   SEVENTH   MONTH   MOVEMENT.  269 

have  assisted  me  in  my  endeavors  to  awaken  the  church  and 
arouse  the  world  to  a  sense  of  their  awful  danger. 

"  I  pray  God,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  that  you  may  re- 
ceive a  reward  in  this  life  of  an  hundred  fold,  and,  in  the 
world  to  come,  eternal  life.  Many  of  you  have  sacrificed 
much,  ■ — your  good  names,  former  associations,  flattering 
prospects  in  life,  occupation,  and  goods ;  and  with  me  you 
have  received  scorn,  reproach  and  scandal  from  those  whom 
it  was  our  souls'  desire  to  benefit.  Yet  not  one  of  you  to 
whom  my  confidence  has  ever  been  given,  has,  to  my 
knowledge,  murmured  or  complained.  You  have  cheerfully 
endured  the  cross,  despised  the  shame,  and  with  me  are  look- 
ing for  and  expecting  the  King  in  all  his  glory.  This  is  to 
me  a  cause  of  gratitude  to  God.  May  he  preserve  you  unto 
the  end.  There  have  been  deceivers  among  us,  but  God 
has  preserved  me  from  giving  them  my  confidence  to  de- 
ceive or  betray. 

"  I  found  on  my  arrival  here  that  my  brethren  had  relin- 
quished the  meeting-house  to  a  small  minority  of  our  church, 
who  separated  from  us  last  spring,  because  the  second  com- 
ing of  Christ  was  there  preached  —  though  they  claim  to  be 
looking  for  him.  Eather  than  contend  with  them,  our  breth- 
ren have  peaceably  relinquished  the  chapel  to    them,  and 

will  build,  if  time  continues 

"  William  Miller." 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

THE     SEVENTH     MONTH     MOVEMENT ANTICIPATIONS     OF     CHRIST'S 

COMING THE    DERRY  CAMP-MEETING DISAPPOINTMENT THE 

NOBLEMAN  AND  HIS  SERVANTS NEED  OF  PATIENCE CONFER- 
ENCE AT  LOW  HAMPTON  —  EASY  MODE  OF  CONVERTING  MEN, 
ETC. 

For  a  few  months  previous  to  this  time,  the  attention  of 
some  had  been  directed  to  the  tenth  day  of  the  seventh 
month  of  the  current  Jewish  year,  as  the  probable  termina- 
tion of  several  prophetic  periods.     This  was  not  generally 


2T0  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

received  with  favor  by  those  who  sympathized  with  Mr, 
Miller,  till  a  few  weeks  previous  to  the  time  designated, 
which,  on  that  year,  following  the  reckoning  of  the  Caraite 
Jews,  fell  on  the  22d  day  of  October.  Mr.  Miller  had.  a 
year  and  a  half  previous,  called  attention  to  the  seventh  month 
as  an  important  one  in  the  Jewish  dispensation ;  but  as  late 
as  the  date  of  his  last  letter  (September  30)  he  had  discoun- 
tenanced the  positiveness  with  which  some  were  then  re- 
garding it.  On  the  6th  of  October  he  was  first  led  to  favor 
the  expectation  which  pointed  to  that  month,  and  thus 
wrote :  "If  Christ  does  not  come  within  twenty  or  twenty- 
five  days,  I  shall  feel  twice  the  disappointment  I  did  in  the 
spring." 

About  the  same  time,  also,  the  belief  in  the  given  day 
was  generally  received.  There  were  exceptions,  but  it  is 
the  duty  of  the  impartial  historian  to  record  the  fact,  that 
those  who  had  embraced  the  views  of  Mr.  Miller,  did,  with 
great  unanimity,  heartily  and  honestly  believe  that  on  a 
given  day  they  should  behold  the  coming  of  the  King  of 
glory. 

The  world  cannot  understand  how  that  could  be  ;  and 
many  who  professed  the  name  of  Christ,  have  spoken  con- 
temptuously of  such  an  expectation.  But  those  who  in 
sincerity  love  the  Saviour,  can  never  feel  the  least  emotion 
of  contempt  for  such  a  hope.  The  effect  on  those  entertain- 
ing this  belief  is  thus  described  by  Mr.  Miller,  in  a  letter 
dated  October  11,  1844. 

{C I  think  I  have  never  seen  among  our  brethren  such 
faith  as  is  manifested  in  the  seventh  month.  'lie  will 
come,'  is  the  common  expression.  '  He  will  not  tarry  the 
second  time,"  is  their  general  reply.  There  is  a  forsaking 
of  the  world,  an  unconcern  for  the  wants  of  life,  a  general 
searching  of  heart,  confession  of  sin,  and  a  deep  feeling  in 
prayer  for  Christ  to  come.  A  preparation  of  heart  to  meet 
him  seems  to  be  the  labor  of  their  agonizing  spirits.  There 
is  something  in  this  present  waking  up  different  from  any- 
thing I  have  ever  before  seen.  There  is  no  great  expression 
of  joy :  that  is,  as  it  were,  suppressed  for  a  future  occasion, 
when  all  heaven  and  earth  will  rejoice  together  with  joy 
unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.     There  is  no  shouting :  that, 


LETTER  TO   MR.    HIMES.  271 

too,  is  reserved  for  the  shout  from  heaven.  The  singers  are 
silent :  they  are  waiting  to  join  the  angelic  hosts,  the  choir 
from  heaven.  No  arguments  are  used  or  needed  :  all  seem 
convinced  that  they  have  the  truth.  There  is  no  clashing 
of  sentiments  :  all  are  of  one  heart  and  of  one  mind.  Our 
meetings  are  all  occupied  with  prayer,  and  exhortation  to  love 
and  obedience.  The  general  expression  is,  c  Behold,  the 
Bridegroom  cometh ;  go  ye  out  to  meet  him.'  Amen.  Even 
so  come,  Lord  Jesus  !  William  Miller." 

The  natural  heart  would  be  unable  to  realize  that  any 
emotion,  but  that  of  fear  and  dread,  could  fill  the  minds  of 
those  thus  believing.  But  wThen  the  secrets  of  the  great 
day  shall  be  made  known,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  coming 
of  Christ  was  ardently  desired  by  them,  and  that  their  hearts 
were  filled  with  a  holy  joy,  wThile  they  were  subdued  by  awe, 
as  standing  in  the  presence  of  the  Governor  of  the  Universe. 
The  state  of  mind  thus  produced  wras  a  great  moral  spectacle, 
upon  which  those  who  participated  in  it  will  ever  look  back 
with  pleasure,  and  without  regret. 

The  next  day  Mr.  Miller  wrote  again  as  follows  : 

"  Low  Hampton,  October  12th,  1844. 

'-Dear  Brother  Himes  :  —  Perhaps  you  may  think  me 
rather  too  troublesome  to  write  every  day  ;  but  time  is  now 
so  short,  and  the  fulfilling  of  those  glories  which  you  have 
assisted  me,  more  than  any  other  human  being,  to  proclaim, 
is  so  near,  I  cannot  help  or  refrain  from  congratulating 
you  daily  on  the  glorious  prospect  we  have  of  soon  entering 
the  gates  of  the  beloved  city,  and  of  soon  harping  on  the 
golden  harps  the  everlasting  song  of  hallelujah  to  the  Lamb. 

:'  Yes,  my  brother,  you  have  borne  the  shame  attached  to 
my  name,  for  some  few  years  past,  without  a  murmur  or 
complaint.  I  believe  it  was  for  Jesus'  sake,  for  wre  had  noth- 
ing in  common,  in  a  worldly  point  of  view,  to  prompt  you, 
at  least,  to  such  an  unnatural  connection.  Our  sectarian 
creeds  were  at  antipodes,  our  ages  very  dissimilar,  and  our 
habits  at  a  wide  difference.  You  had  seen  enough,  when 
we  became  acquainted,  to  know  that  your  worldly  reputation 
and  interest  must  suffer ;  and  yet  you  fearlessly  left  all, 
launched  forth  into  this  glorious  cause, —  so  little  under- 
24 


272  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

V 

stood,  so  perfectly  hated  by  all  the  worldly-minded  and 
popular  men  of  our  age.  This,  to  me,  was  a  remarkable 
evidence  that  God  was  my  helper,  and  that  he  would  in  the 
end  justify  us  in  the  work  which  he  must  have  called  us  to 
perform. 

"  You  must  bear  with  me,  then,  in  my  folly,  if  I  should 
seem  to  boast ;  for  there  has  been  no  scene  in  my  life  where 
the  hand  of  God  has  been  more  visible  than  in  raising  you 
up  to  assist  me  in  this  work.  Had  it  not  been  for  a  few  of 
you,  who  helped  stay  up  my  feeble  hands,  I  must  have 
fainted ;  but,  blessed  be  the  name  of  God,  I  am  now  stronger 
than  ever  in  faith,  and  more  and  more  confident  that  we  are 
within  a  few  days  of  the  crown  of  glory.  I  do  not  expect  to 
see  you  again  in  this  life,  but  I  do  hope  to  see  you  soon 
crowned  in  glory,  and  robed  in  the  spotless  garment  of 
Christ's  righteousness.  I  expect  soon,  with  you  and  all 
true  believers  and  co-workers  in  this  blessed  work,  to  meet 
around  the  great  white  throne,  to  receive  the  reward  of  our 
sufferings  for  the  name  of  Jesus.  I  feel  unworthy,  and 
were  it  not  for  Christ's  worthiness,  and  the  promise  of  God 
to  save  all  that  believe,  I  should  have  no  hope.  But,  blessed 
be  God,  his  grace  and  spirit  have  given  me  hope,  and  taught 
me  to  believe  all  things  '  which  are  written  in  the  law  and 
in  the  prophets.' 

"  Our  meeting  last  evening  was  very  interesting  and 
solemn.  Our  brethren  came  in  from  adjacent  towns.  All 
of  our  hearts  are  comforted  and  faith  strengthened  that  the 
seventh  month  begins  to-morrow.  We  have  two  meetings 
to-day,  and  we  expect  the  Spirit  of  God  to  be  with  us. 

Let  us  all  be  faithful  even  to  the  end.     If 

we  faint  not  we  shall  reap  a  rich  harvest." 

Monday,  October  13th,  he  again  wrote  :  "  Yesterday  was 
a  glorious  day  with  us.  We  commemorated  the  Lord's 
supper.  Some  of  those  who  went  out  from  us  came  back, 
and  confessed  their  wrong 

"  In  what  a  grand  and  awful  time  we  live. 

"  Great  God,  my  soul  looks  up  to  thine 
Eternal  purpose  still, — 
The  promise  which  the  word  divine 
Engages  to  fulfil. 


THE   CAMP-MEETING   IN   DERRY.  273 

" 1  will  cut  loose  from  worldly  care, 

And  hope,  but  never  fear; 

My  daily  cry,  and  nightly  prayer, 

Is  ■  Jesus,  now  appear.' 
««  Come,  Holy  God,  thy  grace  to  bring, 

And  rule  on  David's  throne, 

While  heaven's  high  arch  the  echoes  ring, 

He  comes,  and  all  is  done. 

"  I  am,  as  ever,  yours, 

"William  Miller. 'j 

The  phenomenon  of  a  large  number  of  intelligent  persons 
looking  for  the  end  of  all  earthly  things  was  an  enigma  to 
mere  spectators,  and  would  naturally  elicit  comment.  The 
following  remarks,  in  the  "  Middlesex  Standard,"  by  a 
visitor  at  a  camp-meeting  held  in  Derry,  N.  H.,  about  this 
time,  were  conceived  in  a  spirit  of  candor  : 

"  The  Second  Advent! — the  coming  of  our  Lord  in 
person  upon  this  earth,  with  signs,  and  wonders,  and  terrible 
judgment !  —  the  heavens  rolling  together  as  a  scroll !  —  the 
elements  melting  with  fervent  heat! — the  mighty  consum- 
mation of  all  things  at  hand,  with  its  destruction  and  its 
triumphs! — the  sad  wailing  of  the  lost,  and  the  rejoicing 
songs  of  the  glorified !  From  this  over-swarming  hive  of 
industry, —  from  these  crowded  treadmills  of  gain, — here 
were  men  and  women  going  out  in  solemn  earnestness  to 
prepare  for  the  dread  moment,  which  they  verily  suppose  is 
only  a  few  months  distant ; — to  lift  up  their  warning  voices 
in  the  midst  of  scoffers  and  doubters,  and  to  cry  aloud  to 
blind  priests  and  to  careless  churches,  :  Behold,  the  Bride- 
groom COMETH  ! ' 

11  It  was  one  of  the  most  lovely  mornings  of  this  loveliest 
season  of  the  year, —  a  warm,  soft  atmosphere, —  clear  sun- 
shine falling  on  the  city  spires  and  roofs, —  the  hills  of 
Dracut,  quiet  and  green,  in  the  distance,  with  their  white 
farm-houses  and  scattered  trees, —  around  me  the  continual 
tread  of  footsteps  hurrying  to  the  toils  of  the  day, —  mer- 
chants spreading  out  their  wares  for  the  eyes  of  purchasers, 
—  sounds  of  hammers,  the  sharp  clink  of  trowels,  the 
murmur  of  the  great  manufactories,  subdued  by  distance. 
How  was  it  possible,  in  the  midst  of  so  much  life,  in  that 
sunrise  light,  and  in  view  of  all-abounding  beauty,  that  the 
idea  of  '  the  death  of  nature  ? —  the  { baptism  of  the  world  in 


274  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

fire  ' —  could  take  such  a  practical  shape  as  this  ?  Yet  here 
were  sober,  intelligent  men.  gentle  and  pious  women,  who, 
verily  believing  the  end  to  be  close  at  hand,  had  left  their 
counting-rooms,  and  workshops,  and  household  cares,  to 
publish  the  great  tidings,  and  to  startle,  if  possible,  a  care- 
less and  unbelieving  generation  into  preparation  for  the  day 
of  the  Lord,  and  for  that  blessed  millennium,  the  restored 
Paradise ;  when,  renovated  and  renewed  by  its  fire  purga- 
tion, the  earth  shall  become,  as  of  old,  the  •  garden  of  the 
Lord,'  and  the  saints  alone  shall  inherit  it. 

"  Very  serious  and  impressive  is  the  fact,  that  this  idea 
of  a  radical  change  in  our  planet  is  not  only  predicted  in  the 
Scriptures,  but  that  the  earth  herself,  in  her  primitive 
rocks  and  varying  formations,  on  which  is  lithographed  the 
history  of  successive  convulsions,  darkly  prophesies  of  others 
to  come.  The  old  poet  prophets,  all  the  world  over,  have 
sung  of  a  renovated  world.  A  vision  of  it  haunted  the  con- 
templations of  Plato.  It  is  seen  in  the  half-inspired  specu- 
lations of  the  old  Indian  mystics.  The  Cumeean  sibyl  saw 
it  in  her  trances.  The  apostles  and  martyrs  of  our  faith 
looked  for  it  anxiously  and  hopefully.  Gray  anchorites  in 
the  desert,  worn  pilgrims  to  the  holy  places  of  Jewish  and 
Christian  tradition,  prayed  for  its  coming.  It  inspired  the 
gorgeous  vision  of  Augustine's  '  City  of  God.'  In  every 
age  since  the  Christian  era,  from  the  caves,  and  forests,  and 
secluded  ■  upper  chambers '  of  the  times  of  the  first  mission- 
aries of  the  Cross, — from  the  Gothic  temples  of  the  Middle 
Ages, — from  the  bleak  mountain  gorges  of  the  Alps,  when 
the  hunted  heretics  put  up  their  expostulations,  l  How  long, 
0  Lord,  how  long! ' — down  to  the  present  time,  and  from 
this  Deny  camp-ground,  has  been  uttered  the  prophecy  and 
the  prayer  for  its  fulfilment. 

"  How  this  great  idea  manifests  itself  in  the  lives  of  the 
enthusiasts  of  the  days  of  Cromwell !  Think  of  Sir  Henry 
Vane,  cool,  sagacious  statesman  as  he  was,  waiting  with 
eagerness  for  the  foreshadowings  of  the  millennium,  and 
listening,  even  in  the  council-hall,  for  the  blast  of  the  last 
trumpet !     Think  of  the  Fifth  Monarchy  men,^  weary  with 

*  By  referring  to  the  Fifth  Monarchy  men  and  the  men  of  Munster, 
he  mixes  up  those  who  looked  for  the  kingdom  of  God  to  be  set  up  in  this 
world,  and  before  the  resurrection,  with  Millenarians,  who  look  for  it  in 
the  immortal  state. 


I 


THE    CAMP-MEETING   IN   BERRY.  275 

waiting  for  the  long- desired  consummation,  rushing  out, 
with  drawn  swords  and  loaded  matchlocks,  into  the  streets 
of  London,  to  establish  at  once  the  reign  of  King  Jesus ! 
Think  of  the  wild  enthusiasts  of  Munster,  verily  imagining 
that  the  millennial  reign  had  commenced  in  their  city ! 
Still  later,  think  of  Granville  Sharpe,  diligently  laboring  in 
his  vocation  of  philanthropy,  laying  plans  for  the  slow  but 
beneficent  amelioration  of  the  condition  of  his  countrymen 
and  the  world,  at  the  same  time  maintaining,  with  the  zeal 
of  Father  Miller  himself,  that  the  earth  was  just  on  the 
point  of  combustion,  and  that  the  millennium  would  render 
all  his  benevolent  schemes  of  no  sort  of  consequence  ! 

"  And,  after  all,  is  the  idea  itself  a  vain  one?  Shall  to- 
morrow be  as  to-day  1  Shall  the  antagonism  of  Good  and 
Evil  continue  as  heretofore,  forever?  Is  there  no  hope 
that  this  world-wide  prophecy  of  the  human  soul,  uttered  in 
all  climes,  in  all  times,  shall  be  fulfilled  ?  Who  shall  say  it 
may  not  be  true  ?  Nay,  is  not  its  truth  proved  by  its  uni- 
versality ?  The  hope  of  all  honest  souls  must  be  realized. 
That  through  which  a  distorted,  doubtful  medium  shone 
even  upon  the  martyr  enthusiasts  of  the  French  Revolution, 
—  soft  gleams  of  heaven's  light  rising  over  the  hill  of  man's 
passions  and  crimes, —  the  glorious  ideal  of  Shelley,  who, 
atheist  as  he  was,  through  prejudice  and  early  defective 
education,  saw  the  horizon  of  the  world's  future  kindling 
with  the  light  of  a  better  day, —  that  hope  and  that  faith 
which  constitute,  as  it  were,  the  world's  life,  and  without 
which  it  would  be  dark  and  dead, —  cannot  be  in  vain." 

Thus  moralized  one  who  was  merely  a  spectator.  Oc- 
cupying his  position,  it  is  easy  to  conceive  the  intense 
interest  and  pleasure  felt  by  those  to  whom  the  near-coming 
of  their  Saviour  was  a  welcome  reality. 

The  time  immediately  preceding  the  22d  of  October  was 
one  of  great  calmness  of  mind  and  of  pleasurable  expectation 
on  the  part  of  those  who  regarded  that  point  of  time  with 
interest.  There  was  a  nearness  of  approach  to  God,  and  a 
sweetness  of  communion  with  him,  to  which  those  who  ex- 
perienced it  will  ever  recur  with  pleasure.  During  the  last 
ten  days,  secular  business  was,  for  the  most  part,  suspended ; 
and  those  who  looked  for  the  Advent  gave  themselves  to  the 
24* 


276  LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    MILLER. 

work  of  preparation  for  tliat  event,  as  they  would  for  death. 
were  they  on  a  bed  of  sickness,  expecting  soon  to  close  their 
eyes  on  ear::.!"  scenes  forever. 

There  were  some  cases  of  extravagance,  as  there  have 
been  in  all  great  movements  :  and  i:  would  have  been  strange 
had  there  not  been.  But  the  published  accounts  of  these  were 
greatly  exaggerated,  and  hundreds  of  reports  had  no  founda- 
tion in  fact.  All  reports  respecting  the  pre;-  :i en  of  as- 
cension robes,  eve.,  and  which  are  still  by  many  1;  Sieved,  were 
demonstrated  over  and  over  again  to  be  false  and  scandalous. 
In  the  investigation  of  the  truth  of  such,  no  labor  and  ex- 
pense was  spared:  and  it  became  morally  certain  that  no 
■nee  of  the  kind  anywhere  occurred. 

The  most  culpable  incident,  which  had  any  f: 
fact,  was  in  Philadelphia.     In  opposition  to 
postulations   of  Mr.    Litch   and   other  judic 
company  of  about  one  hundred   and   fifty,  resj 
pretended  vision  of  one  C.  R.  Georgas.  on  tin 
ber   went  out  on  the  Darby-street   road,   ah 
from  Market-street  bridge,  and  encamped  ir. 
two  large   tents,   provided  with  all  neefied  c 
next  morning,  their  faith  in   Georgas'  vision 
all  but  about  a  dozen  returned  to  tne  city.     A 
the  other-  returned.      That  was  an  act  the  r 

•  greatly  exaggerated.  It  met  the  empha 
of  Mr.  Miller  and  the  Adventi.ts  generally 
was  promptly  confessed  by  the  majority  of  tl 
ticipated  in  it. 

The  day  passed,  and   the   expectation   of  ' 
that  time  wae  proved  to  be  premature.     The  : 
nest  (juite  saddened,  but  were  net  dish-arter 
ing  ;:  the  time.      This  was  the  only  specific  day  whn 
regarded   by   intelligent   Adventists   with   any   positiveness. 
There  were  other  days  named  by  these  whose  opinions  were 
received  wi;h  no  favor  :   but  their  unauthorized  declarations 
should  nor  be  imputed  to  the  body. 

Tne  fact  that  neanv  sus  their  business  fer  a  few 

days  was  censured  by  opponents  :  but  it  was  only  acting 
consistently  with  their  faith,  opponents  being  judges.  Dr. 
Lowhng.  a  celebrated  Baptist  clergyman  in  Xew  York  city. 
in  a  review  of  Mr.  Miller,  used  this  strong  lan^ua^e  : 


to 

aeee 

ateen  m 

he 

ear 

nest  ex- 

us 

t'~ 

rsons.   a 

n 

1st 

of  Octo- 

eut 

:e 

ur  miles 

a 

fie1. 

d  under 

om 

rv,. 

s.     The 

g  tailed. 

ays  later 

epe 

rt 

ef  which 

tec 

d;^ 

anproval 

its  felly 

e .  s 

e  v 

rhd  par- 

he 

A 

Ivent  at 

lie 

nda 

were  at 

LETTER   OF  MR.  MILLER.  277 

""Were  this  doctrine  of  Mr.  Miller  established  upon  evi- 
dence satisfactory  to  my  own  mind,  I  would  not  rest  till  I 
had  published  in  the  streets,  and  proclaimed  in  the  ears  of 
my  fellow-townsmen,  and  especially  of  my  beloved  flock, 
'  The  day  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand  !  Build  no  more  houses  ! 
Plant  no  more  fields  and  gardens  !  Forsake  your  shops  and 
farms,  and  all  secular  pursuits,  and  give  every  moment  to 
preparation  for  this  great  event !  for  in  three  short  years 
this  earth  shall  be  burnt  up,  and  Christ  shall  come  in  the 
clouds,  awake  the  sleeping  dead,  and  call  all  the  living  before 
his  dread  tribunal.'  " 

In  the  first  communication  received  from  Mr.  Miller  after 
this  time,  he  wrote  as  follows  : 

"  Low  Hampton,  November  10th,  1844. 

"Dear  Brother  Himes  : — I  have  been  waiting  and 
looking  for  the  blessed  hope,  in  expectation  of  realizing  the 
glorious  things  which  God  has  spoken  of  Zion.  Yes  ;  and, 
although  I  have  been  twice  disappointed,  I  am  not  yet  cast 
down  or  discouraged.  God  has  been  with  me  in  spirit,  andN 
has  comforted  me.  I  have  now  much  more  evidence  that  I 
do  believe  in  God's  word.  My  mind  is  perfectly  calm,  and 
my  hope  in  the  coming  of  Christ  is  as  strong  as  ever. 

"  I  have  done  only  what,  after  years  of  solemn  considera- 
tion, I  felt  it  my  solemn  duty  to  do.  If  I  have  erred,  it  has 
been  on  the  side  of  charity,  love  to  my  fellow-men,  and  con- 
viction of  duty  to  God.  I  could  not  see  that  I  should  harm 
my  fellow-men,  even  supposing  the  event  should  not  take 
place  at  the  time  specified ;  for  it  is  a  command  of  our 
Saviour  to  look  for  it,  to  watch  and  be  ready.  And,  if  I 
could  by  any  means,  in  accordance  with  God's  word,  per- 
suade men  to  believe  in  a  crucified,  risen,  and  coming 
Saviour,  I  felt  it  would  have  a  bearing  on  the  everlasting 
welfare  and  happiness  of  such.  I  had  not  a  distant  thought 
of  disturbing  our  churches,  ministers,  or  religious  editors,  or 
of  departing  from  the  best  biblical  commentaries  or  rules 
which  had  been  recommended  for  the  study  of  the  Scrip- 
tures. And,  even  to  this  day,  my  opposers  have  not  been 
able  to  show  wherein  I  have  departed  from  any  rule  laid 
down  by  our  old  standard  Protestant  writers 

"Our  duty  now  is  to  comfort  one  another  with  the  words 


278  LITE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

of  Christ's  coming,  to  strengthen  those  who  are  weak  among 
us,  to  establish  the  wavering,  and  to  raise  up  the  bowed 
down,  speaking  often  one  to  another,  and  forsaking  not  the 
assembling  of  ourselves  together.  Let  our  conversation  be 
in  heaven,  from  whence  we  look  for  the  Saviour ;,  for  the 
time  has  now  come  for  us  to  live  by  faith,  a  faith  that  is  tried 
like  gold  seven  times  purified 

"  Brethren,  hold  fast:  let  no  man  take  your  crown.  I 
have  fixed  my  mind  on  another  time,  and  here  I  mean  to 
stand  until  God  gives  me  more  light,  and  that  is,  to-day, 
to-day,  and  to-day ',  until  he  comes.  Permit  me  to  illustrate 
this  by  a  parable  : 

"  A  certain  nobleman,  about  taking  a  long  journey,  called 
together  his  servants,  gave  instructions  to  every  one  respect- 
ing their  work,  and  commanded  them  to  be  faithful  in  their 
several  occupations  :  and,  at  his  return,  each  one  was  to  be 
rewarded  according  as  his  work  should  be  clone.  He  in- 
formed them  how  many  days  he  should  be  absent,  but  did 
not  give  them  the  time  in  the  night  when  he  should  return  ; 
but  informed  them  that,  if  they  would  watch,  they  should 
know  when  he  was  near,  even  at  the  door.  And  he  informed 
them  how  they  might  know  this  :  they  would  first  see  the 
lights  of  his  carriage  in  the  distance,  and  they  would  hear 
the  rumbling  of  his  carriage-wheels,  when  they  must  go  out 
and  immediately  open  for  him  the  portal  gates.  Whether  he 
should  come  in  the  first,  second,  third,  or  fourth  watch,  he 
would  not  then  inform  them :  but  commanded  them  to 
watch. 

"  After  he  was  gone,  many  of  the  servants  began  to  neg- 
lect their  Master's  business,  and  to  form  plans  for  their  own 
amusement;  and  thus  the  days  appointed  for  their  Master's 
return  were  forgotten.  The  giddy  whirl  of  dissipation  filled 
their  mind,  time  passed  rapidly  along,  and  the  days  had 
nearly  expired,  when  some  of  the  servants  discovered  the 
record  of  them  in  the  steward's  book.  This  was  immediately 
read  in  the  hearing  of  all,  and  created  no  small  excitement 
among  them.  Some  said  the  time  was  not  revealed,  because 
the  Master  said  the  watch  was  not  known.  Others  declared 
that  he  would  never  return,  but  would  send  his  principal 
servant,  when  they  should  have  a  feasting  time  to  their  own 
liking.     Thus  were  they  disputing  and  wrangling,  until  the 


NEED    OF   PATIENCE.  279 

days,  according  to  the  best  reckoning  they  could  make,  had 
run  out.  and  the  night  came  in  which  some  of  them  expected 
him.  The  porter  and  a  few  others  determined  to  watch, 
while  the  remainder  of  the  servants  were  feasting  and  drink- 
ing. The  former  kept  a  good  look-out ;  for,  at  the  first 
watch,  they  expected  their  master.  They  thought  that  they 
saw  the  light,  and  heard  the  rumbling  of  the  wheels.  They 
ran  among  the  servants,  and  cried,  *  Behold  !  the  Master 
cometh.'  This  made  no  small  stir,  and  caused  many  to 
make  preparation  for  his  return.  But  it  proved  to  be  a  false 
alarm.  Then  the  other  servants  ridiculed  the  porter  and 
his  friends  for  their  fear,  as  they  called  it,  and  returned  to 
their  feasting.  The  porter  and  his  friends  were  vigilant 
until  the  second  watch,  when  they  were  again  disappointed ; 
and  those  who  had  not  watched  were  more  vexed  than  ever. 
They  scoffed  and  mocked,  and  turned  some  of  the  others  out 
doors.  Again  they  waited  for  the  third  watch ;  and  again, 
they  were  disappointed.  The  majority  of  the  servants,  more 
angry  than  ever,  now  beat  and  bruise  the  porter  and  his 
friends,  and  turn  them  all  out  of  the  house,  lock  the  doors, 
and  lay  themselves  down  to  sleep.  At  the  fourth  watch  the 
Master  comes,  and  finds  the  porter  and  a  few  companions 
watching,  while  the  doors  are  barred,  and  the  remainder  of 
the  servants  are  asleep. 

"Now  let  me  inquire,  Will  the  Master  condemn  the  porter 
and  his  friends  for  making  those  false  alarms  ?  Will  he 
punish  them  for  disturbing  the  carousings  of  their  brethren  ? 
Which  of  these  two  classes  of  servants  will  have  shown  the 
most  love  for  their  Master?     Let  each  one  answer  these 

questions,  and  decide  his  own  case  justly 

"  Yours,  as  ever,  looking,  &c, 

"William  Miller." 

On  the  18th  of  November  he  wrote  an  article  for  the 
Herald  on  the  necessity  of  exercising  patience  unto  the  com- 
ing of  the  Lord.  He  characterized  that  as  the  time  of  pa- 
tience, when  "  ye  have  need  of  patience,  that,  after  ye  have 
done  the  will  of  God,  ye  might  receive  the  promise  ;  for  yet 
a  little  while,  and  he  that  shall  come  will  come,  and  will  not 
tarry."  —  Heb.  10:   36,  37.     Therefore  he  exhorted  them, 


280  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

saying,  "  Be  ye  also  patient :  establish  your  hearts  ;  for  the 
coming  of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh."  —  Jas.  5  :   8. 

There  was  at  that  time,  certainly,  great  need  of  the  exer- 
cise of  patience;  for  taunting  expressions,  like  u  You  have 
not  gone  up  yet!  "  or  "  When  are  you  going  up,  now?" 
were  no  uncommon  salutation,  even  from  some  who  professed 
to  believe  that  God  has  u  appointed  a  day  in  the  which  he 
will  judge  the  world  ;  "  when  the  saints  will  "  be  caught  up 
together  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air ; "  and  that  the  elements 
will  "  melt  with  fervent  heat." 

Owing  to  this  state  of  things,  he  was  led  to  consider  that 
his  work  as  a  public  speaker  was  done  ;  that  God,  in  his 
providence,  had  closed  the  door  of  his  access  to  the  people  ; 
and  that,  consequently,  he  had  nothing  more  to  do  in  the 
Way  of  warning  sinners  to  prepare  for  the  coming  of  Christ, 
which,  he  expressed  his  confidence  in  the  same  letter,  would 
not  extend  beyond  that  Jewish  year. 

On  the  29th  of  November,  he  wrote  to  Eld.  T.  B.  Jones  : 
"The  disappointment  which  we  have  experienced,  in  my 
opinion,  could  never  have  been  foreseen  or  avoided ;  and  we 
have  been  honest  men,  and  believed  in  the  truth  of  the  Bible. 
I  have  had  time,  a  few  weeks  past,  to  review  the  whole  sub- 
ject, and,  with  all  the  aid  of  Stuart,  Chase,  Weeks,  Bush, 
and  the  whole  school  of  modern  writers,  I  cannot  see  why 
we  were  not  right.  Taking  them  altogether,  instead  of  dis- 
proving our  position,  they  disprove  each  other,  and  confirm 
me  in  my  views  of  prophecy. 

"  But,  say  you,  time  has  shown  us  wrong.  I  am  not  so 
certain  of  that.  Suppose  that  Christ  should  come  before 
the  end  of  this  Jewish  year :  every  honest  man  would  say 
we  were  right.  And  if  the  world  should  stand  two,  or  even 
three  years  more,  it  would  not,  in  the  least,  affect  the  manner 
of  the  prophecy,  but  the  time.  One  thing  I  do  know,  I  have 
preached  nothing  but  what  I  believed ;  and  God  has  been 
with  me ;  his  power  has  been  manifested  in  the  work,  and 
much  good  has  been  effected ;  for  the  people  have  read  the 
Bible  for  themselves,  and  no  one  can  honestly  say  that  he 
has  been  deceived  by  me.  My  advice  has  alwTays  been  for 
each  to  study  the  evidence  of  his  faith  for  himself." 

Four  days  later  he  again  wrote  to  the  Herald : 


CORRESPONDENCE.  281 

"  Dear  Brethren  :  — I  cannot  sit  down  to  write  with- 
out the  reflection  that  this  letter  may  never  reach  its  desti- 
nation. Yet  I  believe  in  occupying  till  Christ  shall-  come. 
Therefore,  I  still  feel  it  my  duty  to  occasionally  drop  you  a 
line,  to  let  you  know  how  my  soul  prospers,  and  how  my 
faith  holds  out.  As  it  respects  the  soul, —  I  have  never 
enjoyed  more  calmness  of  mind,  nor  more  resignation  to  the 
holy  will  of  God,  and  patience  of  spirit,  than  I  have  within 
a  few  weeks  past.  My  soul,  I  think,  is  stayed  on  God, 
and  I  enjoy  peace  like  a  river.  For  years  past,  I  have  often 
had  a  spirit  of  impatience  for  Christ  to  come,  and  have  felt 
grieved  in  soul  because  I  found  in  my  heart  so  much  of  what 
I  called  a  spirit  of  fretfulness,  and  a  mind  full  of  impatience. 
But,  I  bless  God,  I  have  had  but  little  of  that  recently.  I 
have  had  great  reason  to  thank  God  for  his  abundant  good- 
ness in  this  respect.  My  faith  is  stronger  than  ever ;  and 
this  is  somewhat  remarkable,  when  I  reflect  on  the  disap- 
pointment I  have  met  in  my  former  expectations.  But 
here,  too,  I  see  the  good  hand  of  God  in  my  strength  of 
faith. 

"  I  believe  the  ground  we  have  formerly  stood  upon,  as  it 
regards  the  chronology  of  prophecy,  is  the  only  ground  we 
can  take ;  and  if  the  defect  is  in  human  chronology,  then 
no  human  knowledge  is  sufficient  in  this  age  to  rectify  it 
with  any  degree  of  certainty  :  and  I  see  no  good  that  can  be 
accomplished  by  taking  a  stand  for  any  future  period,  with 
less  evidence  than  we  had  for  1843-4.  For  those  who 
would  not  believe,  with  all  the  evidence  we  then  produced. 
we  cannot  expect  will  now  believe  with  much  less   evidence. 

"  Again,  it  is  to  me  almost  a  demonstration,  that  God's 
hand  is  seen  in  this  thing.  Many  thousands,  to  all  human 
appearance,  have  been  made-  to  study  the  Scriptures  by  the 
preaching  of  the  time ;  and  by  that  means,  through  faith 
and  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Christ,  have  been  recon- 
ciled to  God.  And  those  of  us  wTho  have  been  familiar  with 
the  fruits  and  effects  of  the  preaching  of  this  doctrine  must 
acknowledge  that  He  has  been  with  us  in  so  doing,  and  His 
wisdom  has  in  a  great  measure  marked  out  our  path,  which 
he  has  devised  for  such  good  as  he  will  accomplish  in  his 
own  time  and  manner ;  as  in  the  case  of  Nineveh  by  the 
preaching  of  Jonah.     If  this  should  be  the  real  state  of  the 


282  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

case,  and  we  should  go  on  to  set  other  times  in  the  future, 
we  might  possibly  be  found  frustrating,  or  trying  to  at  least, 
and  receive  no  blessing.  I  think  my  brethren  will  admit 
that  God  has  been  in  the  work,  and  he  has  tried  our  faith  in 
the  best  possible  manner 

u  We  have  erred  in  many  things,  and  even  the  second  ad- 
vent brethren  were  not  prepared  for  the  coming  of  Christ ; 
they  had,  many  of  them,  left  the  work  of  the  Lord,  and  had 
been  doing  their  own  work.  The  work  of  the  Lord,  which 
he  had  commanded  us  to  do,  was  to  make  the  vision  plain,  to 
write  it  on  tables,  to  give  the  alarm,  the  midnight  cry,  and 
wake  up  the  virgins ;  and  while  these  things,  and  these  things 
only,  were  attended  to,  our  work  prospered,  and  God  was  with 
us.  And  now,  my  dear  brethren,  permit  me  to  be  plain. 
I  hope  all  who  are  worth  saving  are  humble  enough  to  bear 
my  reproof,  and  I  mean  to  give  it  with  the  sincerest  of  mo- 
tives, and  with  the  kindest  affection  of  my  heart. 

"  The  causes  which  required  God's  chastening  hand  upon 
us  were,  in  my  humble  opinion,  Pride,  Fanaticism  and 
Sectarianism. 

"  Pride  worked  in  many  ways.  We  ascribed  our  con- 
quest in  argument  over  our  opponents  to  ourselves.  We  were 
seeking  the  honors  or  applause  of  men,  more  than  of  God. 
We  were,  some  of  us,  seeking  to  be  leaders,  instead  of  being 
servants ;  boasting  too  much  of  our  doing. 

"  Fanaticism.  I  know  our  enemies  accused  us  of  this 
before  we  were  guilty ;  but  this  did  not  excuse  us  for  run- 
ning into  it.  A  thousand  expressions  were  used,  without 
thought  or  reflection,  and  I  thought  sometimes  very  irrever- 
ently, such  as  '  Bless  God,'  &c.  I  was  afraid  it  was  done 
in  very  many  cases  to  the  appearance  of  outward  piety,  rather 
than  as  the  hidden  manna  of  the  heart.  Sometimes  our 
meetings  were  distinguished  by  noise  and  confusion,  and  — - 
forgive  me,  brethren,  if  I  express  myself  too  strongly  —  it 
appeared  to  me  more  like  Babel,  than  a  solemn  assembly  of 
penitents  bowing  in  humble  reverence  before  a  holy  God. 
I  have  often  obtained  more  evidence  of  inward  piety  from  a 
kindling  eye,  a  wet  cheek,  and  a  choked  utterance,  than 
from  all  the  noise  in  Christendom. 

"  Sectarianism.  This  is  always  produced  by  some  pri- 
vate opinion  of  man,  rather  than  by  the  plain  declaration  of 


CONFERENCE   AT   LOW   HAMPTON.  283 

God's  word.  For  years  after  I  began  to  proclaim  this 
blessed  truth  of  Christ  at  the  door,  I  never,  if  possible  to 
avoid  it,  even  alluded  to  sectarian  principles ;  and  the  first 
objection  my  Baptist  brethren  brought  against  me,  was,  that 
I  mixed  with,  and  preached  unto,  all  denominations,  even  to 
Unitarians,  &c.  But  we  have  recently,  my  brethren,  been 
guilty  of  raising  up  a  sect  of  our  own ;  for  the  very  things 
which  our  fathers  did,  when  they  became  sects,  we  have 
been  doing.  We  have,  like  them,  cried  Babylon !  Baby- 
lon !  Babylon  !  against  all  but  Advent  ists.  We  have 
proclaimed  and  discussed,  '  pro  et  con,'  many  sectarian  dog- 
mas, which  have  nothing  to  do  with  our  message.  May  God 
forgive  us  !  And  now,  brethren,  we  have  need  of  patience, 
that  after  we  have  done  the  will  of  God,  we  may  receive  the 
promise.  "  Yours  as  ever, 

"William  Miller. 
11  Low  Hampton,  December  3,  1844." 

On  the  28th  and  29th  of  December,  a  conference  was 
held  at  Low  Hampton,  N.  Y.,  where  Mr.  M.  spoke  of  the 
importance  of  being  found  at  one's  post  at  the  coming  of  the 
Master.  And,  though  he  thought  his  work  nearly  done,  yet 
he  should,  as  he  ever  had  done,  follow  the  leadings  of  Provi- 
dence, and  he  hoped  to  be  found  at  his  post  ' '  when  the 
King  of  kings  comes." 

An  address  was  then  written  by  Mr.  Miller,  to  those  dis- 
appointed with  him,  in  which  he  said  : 

"  We  thank  God  always  on  your  behalf,  when  we  hear, 
as  we  already  have,  that  your  and  our  late  disappointment 
has  produced  in  you,  and  we  hope  in  us  also,  a  deep  humil- 
iation and  a  careful  inspection  of  our  hearts.  And  though 
we  are  humbled,  and  in  measure  pained,  by  the  jeers  of  a 
wicked  and  perverse  generation,  we  are  not  terrified  nor  cast 
down.  .  .  You  can,  all  of  you,  when  inquired  of  for  the 
reasons  of  your  hope,  open  your  Bibles,  and  with  meekness 
and  fear  show  the  inquirer  why  you  hope  in  the  glorious 
appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ. 
You  need  not  in  a  single  instance  refer  the  inquirer  to  your 
minister,  for  the  reason  of  your  faith.  .  .  .  Your  creed  is 
the  Scriptures ;  your  spelling-book  is  the  Bible  ;  your  gram- 
mar is  the  Word  indited  by  the  Spirit;  your  geography 
25 


284  LIFE    OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

respects  the  promised  inheritance  of  the  Holy  Land ;  your 
astronomy  respects  the  bright  starry  crown  of  righteousness ; 
your  philosophy  is  the  wisdom  which  cometh  down  from 
God ;  your  bond  of  union  is  the  love  and  fellowship  of  the 
saints  ;  your  teacher  is  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  your  professor 
is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  your  recitation  room  is  your 
closet ;  your  recitations  are  heard  in  your  prayers,  and  your 
songs  fill  up  your  vacations.  We  speak  not  of  rewards, 
diplomas,  and  degrees,  for  these  are  reserved  in  heaven  for 
us,  when  the  dusty  walls  of  this  tabernacle  shall  be  dis- 
solved, and  we  be  called  home  into  the  new  heavens  and  new 
earth,  to  a  full  fruition  of  that  hope  of  which  we  are  not 
ashamed. 

"  We  exhort  you,  by  all  the  love  and  fellowship  of  the 
saints,  to  hold  fast  to  this  hope.  It  is  warranted  by  every 
promise  in  the  word  of  God.  It  is  secured  to  you  by  the 
two  immutable  things, —  the  council  and  oath  of  God,  in 
which  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  lie.  It  is  ratified  and 
sealed  by  the  death,  blood,  and  resurrection  and  life  of 
Jesus  Christ.  You  have  already  had  a  foretaste  of  the  bliss 
of  this  hope,  in  the  seventh  month,  when  every  moment  you 
looked  for  the  heavens  to  open,  and  reveal  unto  your  gaze 
the  King  of  Glory.  Yes,  your  whole  soul  was  ravished 
with  a  holy  joy  when  you  expected  to  hear  the  shout  of  the 
heavenly  host,  descending  from  the  Father's  glory,  to  wel- 
come you,  a  weary  pilgrim,  to  your  blessed  abode  of  eternal 
rest.  In  that  eventful  period,  where  was  the  world,  with 
all  its  vain  allurements  and  empty  show?  It  was  gone. 
Had  our  Saviour  then  come,  no  tears  would  have  fallen  for 
a  receding  world,  no  sighs  would  have  heaved  our  breasts 
for  a  dissolving  earth,  with  all  its  pomp,  its  pleasures,  or  its 
praises.  All  this  was  then  no  more  to  us  than  a  bubble 
on  Niagara's  cataract.  God's  goodness  then  gave  us  a 
slight  repast,  like  Elijah's  meat  that  lasted  forty  days. 
And  how  can  you  or  we  give  up  a  hope  so  full  of  joy,  of 
holy  love,  and  heavenly  anticipation?     .... 

"But  we  are  taunted  with,  '0!  you  have  prolonged 
your  vision  again  and  again,  and  have  failed  every  time ; 
now,  won't  you  give  it  up  and  come  back  to  us  ?  You  are  not 
honest  if  you  will  not.'  When  they  thus  accuse  us,  have 
we  nothing  to  say  ?    If  we  altogether  hold  our  peace,  they 


ADDRESS   OF   MR.    MILLER.  285 

will  be  wise  in  their  own  conceits,  and  go  and  report  that 
they  have  shut  our  mouths,  so  that  we  could  not  say  a  word 
for  ourselves,  and  thus  the  cause  would  be  injured.  But 
never  fear,  brethren  ;  God  has  told  you  what  to  say.  Do 
as  he  bids  you,  and  he  will  take  care  of  the  consequences. 
God  says,  c  Say  unto  them,  the  days  are  at  hand,  and  the 
effect  of  every  vision.'     .... 

•  •  We  hope  that  none  of  us  will  try  to  change  the  chro- 
nology of  the  visions  :  for  they  must  all  fail  in  our  eyes. 
If  any  vision  should  be  so  construed  as  to  fix  on  another 
definite  time  in  the  future,  we  cannot  conceive  how  the 
Scripture  is  fulfilled,  that  '  every  vision  faileth.'  Let  us, 
then,  be  satisfied  in  patiently  waiting  God's  time.  But  let 
us  be  careful  that  we  do  not  lay  off  our  armor,  cease  our 
watching,  sleep  at  our  post,  or  be  caught  in  a  snare,  when 
the  Son  of  Man  shall  come.  It  is  better  to  be  ready  before 
the  time,  and  to  wait  a  while,  than  not  to  be  ready  when  the 
time  shall  come,  —  to  be  lost.  We  exhort  you,  then,  with 
the  Lord's  advice,  •  Be  like  men  waiting  for  their  Lord,  that 
when  he  cometh  they  may  open  to  him  immediately.' 

'*  Again  we  exhort  you,  brethren,  that  every  one  may 
edify  and  be  edified,  that  you  forsake  not  the  assembling  of 
yourselves  together  as  often  as  your  situation  and  circum- 
stances shall  permit ;  that  we  may  comfort  and  console  each 
other  in  our  trials,  be  ourselves  established  in  the  present 
truth,  and  our  minds  be  stirred  up  to  remember  that  our 
Judge  standeth  at  the  door.  How  can  we,  who  have  taken 
so  much  delight  in  the  study  of  the  blessed  Bible,  return  to 
the  beggarly  elements  of  vain  philosophy  and  traditions  of 
the  fathers  ?     .     .     .     . 

"  Again,  we  exhort  you,  brethren,  to  be  faithful  in  busi- 
ness. Let  every  one  labor  with  his  hands  in  the  several 
callings  in  which  God  has  placed  us,  that  none  of  us  may  be 
a  burden  to  any,  and  that  we  may  all  of  us  have  wTherewith 
to  communicate  and  do  good :  for  it  is  more  blessed  to  give 
than  to  receive ;  and  that  we  may  none  of  us  give  any  occa- 
sion to  our  enemies  to  reproach  us  with  being  busy-bodies  in 
other  men's  matters,  or  with  not  providing  for  our  own 
house.  In  thus  doing,  we  may  put  to  silence  the  re- 
proaches of  those  who  are  seeking  every  occasion  to  destroy 
the  doctrine  that  we  rejoice  to  believe.     We  may,  while 


286  l:iz  or  ^illiam  villi: 

engaged  in  our  several  occupations,   be  fervent  in    - 
serving  the  Lord.     If  we  could  not  be.  it  would  be  evidence 
that  we  were  not  engaged  in  a  prorer  calling,  ear  that  cur 
hearts  were  not  righ-  with  God 

••We  also  beseech  you.  brethren,  by  the  coming  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Chris:,  that  ye  be  not  led  about  by  every  spirit, 
but  try  the  spirits:  for  every  spirit  is  not  ::  God^  nod  it  is 
evident  that  there  are  now  many  spirits  in  the  earth. 

There  are  a  few  individuals  among  as  beaching  that 
Christ  has  come,  and  that  we  are  not  mistaken  in  the  time, 
but  in  the  man  it  .  ::  his  com: ng.  Let  of  he  Garefal  lest 
we  cease  from  our  watchfulness,  and  so  that  day  come  upon 
us  unawares.  Remember  that  the  same  Jesus  wfll  eome  in 
like  manner  as  he  was  seen  to  ascend.  Every  eye  dial]  see 
him,  and  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is,  and  be  Ike  him, 
that  day  shall  come  for  which  we  look;  and  then  the 
heavens,  being  on  fire,  shall  be  dissolved  and  the  elements 
shall  melt  with  fervent  heat.     .... 

'•'If  God  means  not  what  he  Bays,  to  whom  shall  we  go 
for  instruction?  Who  has  been  his  counsellor.  ;r  sat  in  the 
council  chamber  of  the  Almighty  !  Man  is  but  grass,  the 
flower  whereof  fadeth.  He  is  but  of  yesterday,  and  his  life 
is  a  breath.  'Cursed  is  man  who  trasteth  in  man.  and 
maketh  flesh  his  arm.  and  :~r  r.r.v.t  '-::  ".ttetl:  tr:m  tite 
Lord.'  Hold  on.  then,  to  the  *  Sure  Word  ::  Prophecy,3 
for  you  will  soon  reap  the  fruits  of  your  faith,  if  you  faint 
not." 

On  the  16th  of  January.  1845,  after  re:  ring  a  pamphlet* 
which  had  been  sent  him.  Mr.  Miller  wrote  as  follows  : 

"  I  never  left  off  reading  any  book,  save  the  Bible,  with 
such  a  deep  and  hearttelt  anxiety  t:  Lave  all  Christians,  of 
all  denominations,  read  it.  as  I  have  this.  I  said  to  myself, 
If  all  would  candidly  read,  and  honestly  compare  this  with 
the  Word  of  God,  all  prejudice  and  preconceived  opinions, 
which  now  serve  to  confuse,  divide,  and  distract  the 
family  of  God  on  earth,  would  be  removed,  and  we  sit:  aid 
see  eye  to  eye  on  the  great  and  glorious  question  of  the 
Master's  return.     Or.  at  least,  all  would  ^ee  the  necessity 

*  The  second  number  of  the  "  Advent  Shield.'5 


EASY   METHOD    OF   CONVERTING   THE   WORLD.      287 

for  it,  and  love  and  pray  for  it ;  and  thus  our  hearts  and 
our  prayers  would  be  one. 

"•I  immediately  began,  in  my  mind,  to  devise  some  plan 
by  which  this  object  could  be  effected.  The  first  plan 
which  my  imagination  suggested,  was  for  each  one  who  is 
already  confirmed  in  the  truth  of  these  things,  and  able,  to 
supply  himself  with  a  copy.  Then  we  would  each  feel 
bound  to  go  to  at  least  one  Christian  friend  every  week, 
and,  by  kind  and  benevolent  means,  get  them  to  read, 
digest,  and  be  converted  to  these  glorious  truths.  I  then 
calculated  that  when  any  one  was  truly  converted,  he  would 
make  another  fresh  and  efficient  missionary.  I  went  so  far 
in  my  imagination  as  to  calculate  that  one  a  week  for  each 
missionary  would  be  light  work;  and  this,  continued  in 
arithmetical  progression,  to  my  surprise  I  found  the  whole 
world  would  be  converted  to  see  eye  to  eye  in  a  very  few 
months. 

f<  What  can  this  mean?  said  I  to  myself.  Has  not  the 
world  wisdom  enough  to  have  tried  this  plan?  Surely 
there  are  thousands  now  living  on  the  earth  wiser  and  better 
than  myself;  why  has  not  the  thing  been  tried  and  suc- 
ceeded before  ? 

"I  then  began  to  look  about  for  a  precedent,  and  my 
mind  first  reverted  to  Jesus  Christ.  Surely,  said  I,  he  had, 
when  on  the  earth,  more  wisdom  than  all  living,  for  the 
devising  of  means;  he  had  all  power  to  accomplish  his  plans; 
he  had  love  enough  to  prompt  him  to  execute  it,  for  he  gave 
his  life  to  redeem  lost  man ;  and,  if  this  plan  would  insure 
success,  he  would  never  fail. 

' '  I  therefore  reviewed  his  life.  The  first  act  of  his 
ministry  was  to  send  out  his  twelve  disciples,  and  other 
seventy  also,  to  go  two  and  "two  into  every  city  in  Judea, 
and  into  private  houses,  if  possible,  to  persuade  men  that 
the  kingdom  of  God  had  come  nigh  unto  them.  He  endued 
them  with  power  from  on  high  to  work  miracles,  in  con- 
firmation of  the  truth  of  their  proclamation.  And  wThat  was 
the  effect  ?  We  cannot  exactly  tell.  We  know  some  things 
which  it  did  not  do.  It  did  not  convert  many  of  their 
political  rulers,  none  of  their  literati,  none  of  the  lawyers  or 
Scribes ;  not  one,  as  we  can  learn,  of  all  the  priests,  and 
none  of  the  principal  sects,  believed.  .  .  .  Some  few 
25* 


288  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM  MILLER, 

years  afterwards,  the  church  at  Jerusalem  tried  the  same 
plan.  They  were  driven  by  persecution  from  that  city,  and 
went  everywhere  preaching  faith,  repentance,  and  the  resur- 
rection. They  had  some  better  success,  yet  not  in  comparison 
to  the  number  who  heard ;  for  Paul  says,  their  sound  went 
out  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.  But  very  few  believed.  Again, 
it  has  been  tried  in  our  day.  For  fifty  years  the  Protestant 
churches  have  been  sending  Bibles,  tracts,  and  publications 
without  number ;  and  is  the  world  converted  ?  No.  It  has 
waxed  worse  and  worse. 

"  My  visionary  scheme  was  demolished  at  a  blow,  and  be- 
came like  Nebuchadnezzar's  image,  as  the  chaff  of  the  sum- 
mer threshing-floor.  Wm.  Miller." 

Soon  after  this,  January  29,  1845,  by  the  action  of  an 
ecclesiastical  council,  Mr.  Miller  and  the  majority  of  the 
church  in  Low  Hampton  were  virtually  separated  from  the 
Baptist  denomination.  The  following  history  of  the  case  was 
communicated  to  a  Baptist  clergyman  in  western  New  York, 
who  had  written  to  Mr.  Miller  for  the  particulars  : 

"Dear  Bro.  Parsons:  —  Your  letter,  asking  for  infor- 
mation concerning  my  exclusion  from  the  Baptist  denomina- 
tion, to  which  I  had  belonged  for  about  thirty  years,  is  re- 
ceived. The  history  of  the  proceedings  against  me  and  my 
brethren  (for  the  church  were  excluded  with  me,  or  quite  a 
large  majority  of  them)  is  simply  as  follows. 

11  The  church,  or  the  majority,  had  embraced  what  is  called 
the  Advent  faith.  While  some  of  us  believed  in  the  time 
(1843),  there  were  others  who  merely  believed  in  the  man- 
ner of  the  Advent,  and  assented  to  its  being  near ;  at  the 
same  time,  there  was  a  small  minority  of  the  church  who 
were  opposed  both  to  the  manner  and  time.  Yet  no  labors 
had  been  taken  on  either  side  while  in  this  situation. 

"  The  church  voted  that  they  would  support  the  gospel, 
or  a  minister,  by  taxing  themselves  equally,  according  to 
their  ability.  Here  the  first  seeds  were  sown  which  indicated 
a  division  of  the  church.  Two  or  three  of  the  rich  brethren 
declared  they  would  not  submit  to  the  vote  of  the  church,  and 
withdrew  their  support.  The  majority  of  the  church  then 
engaged  Elder  Jones,  a  Baptist  minister.  This  was  in  the  fall 
or  summer  of  1843.     In  the  spring  of  1844,  the  minority 


CHURCH   DIFFICULTIES.  289 

engaged  Elder  Dillaway  (a  strong  opposer  of  the  Advent 
doctrine  after  '43),  for  half  of  the  time,  and  demanded  of 
the  church  the  meeting-house.  But  as  Elder  Jones  had 
been  engaged  for  a  year,  the  meeting-house  was  not  given 
up  until  the  fall ;  when  the  brethren,  rather  than  have  any 
contention,  gave  it  up  to  Elder  D.  and  his  hearers,  and  held 
their  meetings  in  a  school-house,  where  the  minority  had 
formerly  held  theirs.  On  the  29th  of  January,  1845,  the 
minority  called  an  ex-parte  council,  in  a  private  manner,  so 
that  it  was  not  known  to  the  church  until  the  council  met. 
This  council,  which  was  constituted  on  the  day  above  men- 
tioned, consisted  of  seven  ministers  and  ten  lay  brethren. 
Enclosed  I  send  you  the  doings  of  the  council,  and  every 
Baptist  can  judge  who  has  departed  from  the  usages  and 
customs  of  the  Baptist  denomination.  We  are  walking  in  the 
ordinances  and  fellowship  as  formerly  in  the  church,  and 
think  it  a  small  thing  to  be  judged  of  men. 

"Yours,  &c.  Wm.  Miller. 

"  Low  Hampton,  April  27,  1846." 

When  the  majority  of  the  church  found  that  an  ex-parte 
council  was  in  session,  they  immediately  came  forward  and 
consented  that  it  should  be  a  mutual  one.  It  will  be  seen 
that  the  minority  of  the  church  consisted  of  only  five  men, 
about  the  same  number  of  persons  who  had  been  suspended 
from  the  church  for  neglect  of  covenant  obligations,  and  a 
number  of  females  who  had  taken  no  part  in  church  matters 
for  many  years. 

The  following  is  the  list  of  charges  submitted  to  the  coun- 
cil by  the  minority  against  the  majority  of  the  church  : 

CHARGES. 

c:  The  Baptist  church  in  Low  Hampton  make  the  following 
statements,  as  the  grounds  of  their  grievances  with  the  ma- 
jority of  the  church,  whom  they  consider  as  having  left  the 
original  platform  of  the  Baptist  denomination,  affording  their 
countenance  to  doctrines  which  time  has  proved  to  be  false, 
and  which  have  been  the  occasion  of  dissension  and  discord 
among  brethren  : 

"  1st.  We  are  grieved  that  the  brethren  claiming  to  be  the 
church  should  have  employed,  in  the  year  1843,  contrary 


290  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

to  our  expressed  wishes,  a  man  of  avowed  sentiments  that 
the  Second  Advent  of  Christ  would  take  place  in  the  year 
1843,  and  whose  known  purpose  was  to  preach  this  doctrine. 

"  2d.  We  are  grieved  that  the  brethren  above  named  should 
take  up  a  labor  with  a  number  of  esteemed  brethren  and  sis- 
ters, and,  as  far  as  their  authority  went,  to  exclude  them  from 
the  church,  because  they  could  not  conscientiously  attend  meet- 
ings where  doctrines  were  preached  which  were  so  manifestly 
unscriptural,  and  of  pernicious  tendency. 

"  3d.  We  are  grieved  that  a  test,  not  known  in  the  Bible, 
of  Christian  character,  should  be  set  up  by  the  above-named 
brethren,  namely  :  A  belief  in  the  second  coming  of  Christ  in 
the  year  1844, —  a  test  which  has  been  brought  to  view  both 
private  and  public. 

"  4th.  We  are  grieved  to  hear  from  the  above-named  breth- 
ren all  those  churches  who  do  not  accord  with  them  in  their 
views,  denounced  as  Babylon,  the  mother  of  harlots,  &c. ; 
and  the  ministry  calumniated  in  a  most  slanderous  manner. 

"5th.  We  are  grieved  to  see  the  above-named  brethren 
countenance  a  departure  from  the  usages  of  the  Baptist 
church,  and  from  scriptural  examples,  in  administering  the 
ordinance  of  baptism  to  persons  without  any  relation  of 
Christian  experience,  or  other  evidence  of  piety  than  belief 
in  their  peculiar  dogmas. 

1 '  6th.  We  are  grieved  that  the  above-named  brethren  should 
violate  their  covenant  engagements,  and  adopt  a  resolution 
disfellowshipping  all  those  who  deserted  from  them,  without 
taking  any  previous  steps  of  labor. 

"  7th.  We  are  grieved  that  the  above-named  brethren 
should  take  away  and  withhold  from  us  the  church  and  society 
books,  and  communion  furniture,  and  other  property  belong- 
ing to  the  meeting-house. 

"  We  would  further  state  that  the  circumstances  are  a  grief 
to  us,  inasmuch  as  they  afford  evident  intimations  of  a  pur- 
pose to  change  the  character  of  this  church  into  that  of  a 
Second  Advent  church,  as  has  been  done  in  many  other 
places,  when  similar  preliminary  measures  have  been  adopted. 
"  Hezekiah  Whittock,  } 
"  Seth  Peck,  i  Committee. 

"Paulinus  Millard,      ) 

"  Hampton,  November  10,  1844." 

[Here  follow  the  names  of  twenty  females,  and  four  males.] 


CHURCH   DIFFICULTIES.  291 

"  Report  of  the  Council  in  the  case  of  the  Baptist  Church 
in  Hampton. 

"  In  the  judgment  of  the  Council  — 

"  1.  Resolved ,  That  the  frst  charge  has  been  sustained, 
and  that  it  is  not  profitable  to  the  cause  of  Christ  to  make 
the  Second  Advent  of  Christ  at  any  definite  time  the  com- 
mon topic  of  discussion  from  the  desk. 

"  2.  Resolved,  That  the  second  charge  was  sustained. 

"  3.  Resolved,  That  the  third  charge  was  sustained. 

"4.  Resolved,  That  the  fourth  charge  was  sustained. 

"  5.  Resolved,  That  the  fifth  charge  was  sustained. 

"  6.  Resolved,  That  the  sixth  charge  was  sustained. 

"Therefore,  we  Resolve,  1st.  That  in  sustaining  the  minor- 
ity in  the  above  charges,  we  regard  them  to  be  the  regular 
Baptist  church  in  Hampton. 

"  2d.  That  we  recommend  this  church  to  hold  itself  to  re- 
ceive members  of  the  majority  upon  suitable  confession. 

"R.  0.  DwyeBj  Chairman. 

"Levi  Parmely,  Secretary. 
"  Hampton,  January  29th:  1845." 

minority  report. 

"  The  minority  of  the  Council  would  most  respectfully  pro- 
test against  the  majority  of  said  Council,  for  the  following 
reasons : 

"  That  the  charges  exhibited  by  the  minority  of  the  church 
were  not  sufficiently  proven  against  the  majority ;  and  several 
of  them,  if  sufficiently  proven,  imply  not  in  themselves  a 
departure  from  the  Scriptures,  nor  from  the  usages  of  the 
Baptist  denomination.  In  no  case  was  it  proven  that  the 
majority  of  said  church  took  any  step  towards  the  minority, 
that  the  Bible  does  not,  in  our  opinion,  fully  sustain  ;  ex- 
cepting that  the  6th  charge  was  proven,  which  is  for  disfel- 
lowshipping  all  those  [members  of  that  church]  who  dissent 
from  them,  without  any  previous  steps  of  labor.  But  that 
act  was  rescinded  by  the  majority  of  the  church,  and  due 
notice  of  it  given  to  the  Council  before  they  made  their  decis- 
ion known  to  the  public,  or  the  parties,  and  the  church  ac- 
companying the  vote  with  a  confession  that  they  were  wrong 
and  regretted  the  act.  The  step,  however,  upon  which  the 
charges  were  founded  against  the  majority,  was  not  taken 


292  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLEK. 

until  the  minority  (composed  of  four  or  five  males  only)  had 
restored  four  or  five  others  who  had  been  excluded  from  fel- 
lowship by  the  majority,  for  the  neglect  of  covenant  obliga- 
tions, and  agreeably  to  the  usages  of  the  Baptist  denomina- 
tion. 

"  The  5th  charge  was  for  departing  from  the  usages  of  the 
denomination,  by  baptizing  persons  without  any  relation  of 
Christian  experience,  or  other  evidence.  This  was  not  proven 
to  be  a  church  act.  The  proof  wTas,  that  the  minister,  who 
preached  for  the  majority,  baptized  a  person  who  insisted 
upon  the  administration  of  the  ordinance  the  same  night ; 
but  not  until  the  minister,  and  one  other  brother  at  least, 
were  convinced  that  the  candidate  was  an  experienced  Chris- 
tian. This  act  was  justified  by  the  undersigned  by  Scripture ; 
as,  for  instance,  the  case  of  Lydia  and  her  household,  the 
Jailer  and  household,  Philip  and  the  Eunuch,  and  also  the 
day  of  Pentecost,  when  there  were  above  three  thousand  bap- 
tized. These  scriptural  examples  are  believed  by  the  under- 
signed to  be  a  sufficient  warrant  for  a  minister  of  the  gospel, 
in  at  least  a  case  of  emergency,  to  baptize,  when  a  candidate 
urges  that  he  dare  not  hazard  until  morning  the  neglect  of 
a  known  duty.  This  baptism  has,  however,  never  been  sanc- 
tioned by  any  church  act  of  the  majority. 

"Asa  further  reason  for  protesting,  it  was  proven  that  the 
minority  brethren  had  set  up  a  separate  meeting,  and,  as 
stated  before,  had  restored,  without  any  confession,  we  believe, 
five  members  of  the  church,  who  had  been  excluded  by  the 
majority  (and  who  were  the  then  acknowledged  regular  Bap- 
tist church),  for  neglect  of  covenant  obligations,  and  not  for 
a  difference  of  opinion  upon  the  Second  Advent,  or  any  other 
question.  Still,  the  majority  of  the  Council  have,  with 
these  facts  staring  them  in  the  face,  acknowledged  and  re- 
solved that  the  four  or  five  brethren,  together  with  the  five 
brethren  and  sisters,  excluded  by  the  majority  for  neglect  of 
the  covenant  obligations,  shall  be  recognized  as  the  regular 
Baptist  church.  It  is  true  that  the  minority  have  several 
names  of  sisters  added  to  their  list,  some  of  whom  have  taken 
but  little  part  in  church  matters  for  many  years.  Although 
the  Council  was  called  as  ex  parte,  yet  after  assembling  it 
was  made  a  mutual  Council. 

"  The  undersigned  verily  believe  that  great  injustice  has 


RESULTS   OF   THE   SEVENTH  MONTH.  293 

been  clone  to  the  majority  for  departing  from  the  usages  of 
our  denomination,  in  setting  up  a  separate  meeting,  and  in 
those  four  or  five  brethren  pretending  to  hold  church  meet- 
ings, and  restoring  members  who  had  been  regularly  ex- 
cluded, and  which,  in  fact,  is  sanctioning  the  same  acts,  or 
worse  ones,  than  those  complained  of  by  the  minority. 

"  Thomas  A.  Sherwood, 
"  Member  of  the  Council  from  the  Kingsbury 

"  Baptist  Church,  Washington  Co.,  N.  Y." 


CHAPTER    XX. 

RESULTS    OF    THE    SEVENTH  MONTH DISCUSSION    OF    NEW    QUESTIONS 

MR.  MILLER'S    POSITION    RESPECTING    THEM,  ETC. 

After  this,  various  questions  began  to  be  mooted  respect- 
ing "the  seventh-month  movement."  Some  contended  that 
it  was  all  ordained  and  ordered  of  God ;  and  others  claimed 
that  it  was  a  work  of  Satan,  to  torment  God's  children  by 
disappointment.  The  majority  of  Adventists  took  the  posi- 
tion that  the  time  was  an  error  of  human  judgment ;  but 
that  preaching  the  coming  of  the  Saviour  in  connection  with 
it,  where  it  was  attended  with  love  to  God,  a  desire  to  save 
men,  and  a  love  for  Christ's  appearing,  was  attended  by  the 
blessing  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  not  because  of  the  error  in  the 
time,  but  because  of  their  desire  to  do  the  will  of  God,  not- 
withstanding the  erroneous  calculation.  These  did  not  deem 
it  proper  to  make  God  responsible  for  their  mistakes. 

Those  who  ascribed  the  work  specified  to  the  devil  soon 
apostatized,  and  walked  no  more  with  Adventists,  some  giv- 
ing up  all  pretensions  to  religion.  Those  who  ascribed  it  all 
to  the  Lord,  or  a  majority  of  such,  went  into  various  fanat- 
ical views  and  practices,  and  imbibed  a  bitter  spirit,  which 
soon  made  a  wide  breach  between  them  and  those  who  were 
willing  to  admit  their  own  imperfections,  and  to  confess  their 
mistake. 

To  be  consistent,  those  who  ascribed  that  movement  en- 


294  LIFE    OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

tirely  to  the  Lord  had  to  consider  that  some  event,  in  con- 
nection with  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  did  transpire  at 
that  time.  And,  as  they  had  taught  that  Christ  would  then 
come,  they  conceived  the  idea  that  he  came  invisibly,  and 
closed  the  door  of  mercy  to  the  sinner  —  illustrating  it  by 
the  parable  of  the  Bridegroom's  coming  and  shutting  the 
door,  after  which  the  foolish  virgins  sought  admittance  in 
vain.  Thus  they  contended  that  the  work  of  preaching  the 
gospel  was  ended. 

It  was  an  object  of  some  importance  to  these  to  get  from 
Mr.  Miller  some  expression  favoring  their  interpretation.  It 
was  known  that  he  held  that,  for  a  period  previous  to  the 
actual  coming  of  Christ,  he  would  cease  to  intercede  for,  and 
the  Holy  Spirit  cease  to  strive  with,  sinners  ;  and  they  were 
in  hopes  to  convince  him  that  that  period  had  arrived.  He 
was  accordingly  overwhelmed  with  letters  asking  his  opinion 
on  that  point.  To  save  replying  to  these,  in  the  Advent 
Herald  of  February  12,  1845,  he  thus  referred  to  the  expe- 
rience of  the  seventh  month  : 

"  The  sympathetic  and  simultaneous  movement  on  the 
minds  of  almost  all  the  Second  Advent  brethren,  and  on 
many  others,  preceding  the  tenth  day,  the  rapidity  with  which 
that  sentiment  was  received,  the  general  credence  that  was 
given  to  it  by  nearly  all  of  those  who  were  looking  for  im- 
mediate redemption,  the  humbling  effect  it  produced  on  the 
hearts  and  conduct  of  those  who  believed, —  in  the  abandon- 
ment of  all  worldly  objects,  the  sacrifice  of  earthly  goods, 
and,  in  many  cases,  the  entire  dedication  of  soul  and  body  to 
God, —  the  deep  and  anxious  feelings  of  heart  which  many 
of  us  felt, —  all  marked  its  character.  Then,  every  moment 
we  expected  the  heavens  would  open  and  reveal  to  us  the 
dear  Saviour,  with  all  his  shining  hosts,  and  that  we  should 
see  the  graves  open,  and  the  loved  forms  of  our  relations 
arise  from  their  dusty  beds  in  immortal  bloom  and  eternal 
life,  and  we  ourselves  pass  the  sudden  change  from  mortality 
to  immortality,  from  time  to  eternity.  Then,  as  we  verily 
thought,  we  had  bid  adieu  to  this  world  of  sin,  of  misery, 
and  woe,  and  expected  to  be  ushered  into  the  new  heavens 
and  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness.  0,  blissful 
day  !  How  solemn,  yet  how  interesting  !  I  hope  to  see  an- 
other day  like  this,  and  to  literally  realize  what  I  then  ex- 


DISCUSSION   OF   NEW   QUESTIONS.  295 

pected.  It  was  a  day  long  to  be  remembered,  and  I  cannot 
account  for  it  on  any  other  principle  than  to  suppose  that 
God's  benevolent  hand  and  wisdom  were  in  the  move- 
ment." 

He  then  recapitulated  the  arguments  which  were  drawn 
from  the  types  in  reference  to  the  seventh  month,  showing 
their  plausibility,  and  proceeded  to  the  second  point  in  the 
controversy,  thus : 

"  But  you  ask  why  I  do  not  show  whether  the  probation 
of  sinners  is  ended.  I  answer,  It  is  a  close  point,  and,  if 
handled  at  all,  it  ought  to  be  done  very  wisely,  and  with  a 
great  deal  of  humility.  I  would  not  grieve,  if  possible  to 
avoid  it,  one  of  Christ's  little  ones." 

He  then  proceeded  to  give  his  views  on  various  Scriptures, 
from  which  he  argued  that,  before  the  end,  such  a  period 
would  transpire,  without  intimating  whether  he  believed  it 
had  arrived. 

The  editors  of  the  Advent  Herald,  in  giving  his  letter, 
replied  to  his  arguments,  and  contended  that  probation  only 
terminated  with  the  personal  coming  of  Christ.  His  letter, 
as  published,  gave  little  satisfaction  to  either  party.  Both 
claimed  him.  To  determine  his  actual  position,  Prof.  N.  N. 
Whiting  wrote  him,  and  Mr.  Miller  replied  as  follows  : 

I 

"My  dear  Brother:  —  Your  favor  of  the  5th  was 

gladly  received,  and  I  take  this  early  opportunity  to  answer 
your  inquiries  as  far  as  my  memory  or  knowledge  will 
admit. 

*•  As  it  respects  your  first  question,  whether,  in  my  judg- 
ment, '  the  time  of  probation  came  to  an  end  on  the  2 2d  of 
October  or  not,'  I  answer,  my  mind  was  not  definite  on  that 
day.  But  the  experience  and  scenes  of  that  month  were 
astounding  to  me,  and  my  mind  wTas  brought  to  a  conclusion 
that  God,  by  his  invisible  angels,  was  separating  the  two 
classes  of  men,  the  chaff  from  the  wheat.  But  to  say  my 
judgment  was  fully  convinced  that  it  was  closed,  I  must  say 
no.  I  know  it  is  true  that,  in  answer  to  a  score  of  letters, 
making  the  same  inquiries  as  yourself,  in  my  letter,  pub- 
lished in  the  Herald  of  February  12,  I  gave  several  texts, 
which,  to  me,  were  evidence  that,  before  Christ  came,  there 
would  be  a  time  when  men  would  seek,  knock,  and  cry,  and 
26 


LIFE    01    WILLIAM    MILLER. 

it  would  not  be  opened  :  for.  how  sinners  con'  "  would 
knock  in  the  eternal  state.  I  have  n:  means  :■:  knowing, 
The  editors  of  the  Herald  knowing  more  about  the  contro- 
versy which  had  begun  in  the  ranks  of  the  Adventists  than 
I  lid  or  could,  in  order  to  prevent  the  mischief  or  harm 
which  they  suppose  1  my  letter  might  do.  attached  their 
notes,  which  gave  the  brethren  on  the  other  side  of  the 
question  m:re  reason  to  suppose  I  had  taken  the  ground  that 
the  deer  was  shut  in  the  seventh  month:  and  they  thus 
claimed  me  on  all  the  fanciful  expositions  of  the  parable  of 
the  virgins. 

••  I  have  ever  been  of  the  opinion  that  my  first  and  last 
vie"  of  that  parable,  as  given  in  my  lectures,  is  the  true 
exposition.  That  parable  was  never  given  to  show  the  exact 
order  or  time  of  marriage  ana  shutting  of  the  dc'O-r  :  but  as 
an  illustration  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  when  these  things 
should  transpire,  i.  e..  in  its  character  '  likened  -ante.'  If 
we  strain  this  parable  to  make  it  imply  an  erder  in  time,  we 
involve  ourselves  in  difficulties  with  other  passages  in  Scrip- 
ture which  I  have  no  fair  means  of  extricating  myself  from. 
especially  those  where  they  are  described  as  asking  ana  beg- 
ging when  it  is  too  late,  which,  to  me.  is  the  very  reason  I 
-  -en;  1  assign  why  the  deer  might  be  shut,  yet  we  ::e  ignorant 
of  the  fact.  » 

••With  our  present  light,  it  woula  ::e  impossible  for  any 
::■  prove  that  the  door  is  shut  :  it  can  only  ;:e  a  cenje:- 
ture.  founded  upon  circumstances  in  the  case.  There  are 
two  cases  which  I  will  mention  :  one  woukt  be  the  cessation 
of  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  upon  the  hearts  of  the  truly 
pious  in  laboring  and  praying  fer  sinners:  and  the  other 
most  be  the  fearful  looking  for  the  fiery  indignation,  which. 
I  think,  according  to  the  Scripture,  must  s-ize  upon  the 
hearts  of  those  who  have  wilfully  rejected  Christ.  The 
hypocrite  is  given  over  to  believe  a  he.  c ens: tiering  himself 
safe   in   his   profession;   ana.    consequently,    the   aespair  of 

of  the  Holy  Spirit  bring  withdrawn  hem  the  minds  of  the 

impenitent,    would  immediately   produce  a    time   of  trouem 
such  as  Daniel  1- :   1   speaks  of:    'Ana  at   that  time  shall 

Michael  stand  op.  the  great  Prince  which  standeth  far  tne 
children  of  thy  people  :   and  there  shall  be  a  time  of  trouble 


DISCUSSION   OF   NEW   QUESTIONS.  297 

such  as  never  was  since  there  was  a  nation,  even  to  that 
same  time :  and  at  that  time  thy  people  shall  be  delivered, 
every  one  that  shall  be  found  written  in  the  book.'  These 
would  at  least  be  evidence  to  my  suspicion,  if  not  to  my  full 
assurance.  It  was  a  fact,  for  a  few  days  in  the  seventh 
month  in  the  circle  of  my  acquaintance,  that  the  reports  I 
heard  from  every  quarter  led  me  to  have  strong  suspicion 
that  we  had  approached  the  time  which  I  cannot  but  believe 
we  must  experience  before  the  end.  I  think  at  present  the 
evidence  is  strong  against  the  idea  of  the  door  being  shut ; 
but  those  brethren  who  have  adopted  the  suspicion  at  least 
ought  to  be  treated  with  a  great  deal  of  kindness.  I  do  not 
like  much  I  have  seen  published  and  spoken  on  both  sides 
of  the  question.  It  is  one  of  that  kind  of  questions  which 
is  calculated  to  divide  warm  friends ;  for  it  cannot  be  settled 
satisfactorily  but  by  time  and  experience. 

"  The  arguments,  in  my  humble  opinion,  on  both  sides, 
want  a  great  quantity  of  brotherly  love  to  make  them  digest 
easily.  I,  then,  beg  and  pray  my  brethren  we  may  let  con- 
tention alone  before  it  is  meddled  with.  And  I  now  plead 
with  those  who  have  supposed  the  door  to  be  shut  to  yield 
the  point  to  our  brethren  of  the  opposite  view;  for  it  is 
evident  at  present  that  all  the  evidence  is  against  its  being 
now  shut,  if  we  can  believe  the  reports  of  our  brethren  from 
different  parts ;  and  surely  my  soul  will  not  permit  me  to 
doubt  their  veracity  who  have  been  with  us  as  pioneers  in 
the  work  of  calling  up  the  world  to  this  important  point  of 
our  faith,  the  second  advent  of  Jesus.  Let  us  be  silent  at 
least  for  two  months,  if  Christ  does  not  come  before,  and  by 
that  time  I  think  we  shall  obtain  more  light ;  and  if  Christ 
does  come,  we  shall  not  wish  to  be  found  contending  with 
brethren  of  a  like  precious  faith  on  a  subject  dependent 
wholly  on  circumstances  in  which  we  may  be  so  likely  to 
err.  I  do  hope  my  advice  will  be  heeded  in  this  thing,  and 
that  we  will  be  patient,  and  not  grieve  each  other ;  for  the 
Judge  is  at  the  door.       .... 

"  William  Miller. 

61  Low  Hampton,  March  10,  1845." 

Soon  after  this  other  views  were  promulgated  by  those 
who  adhered  to  the  "  shut  door."     Some  taught  feet- washing 


298  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

and  kissing  as  religious  ceremonies;  bodily  exercises  and 
mesmeric  ecstasies  were  regarded  as  religious  experience; 
power  to  discern  the  spiritual  condition  of  others  was  claimed, 
&c.  &c. ;  and  they  made  no  scruple  in  denouncing  and  con- 
signing to  perdition  those  whom  they  judged  destitute  of 
religion,  according  to  their  various  standards  and  tests. 
Brotherly  love  gave  place  to  contention  and  disputation ; 
and  the  cause  had  to  bear  the  reproach  of  those  who  had 
thus  departed  from  the  position  occupied  by  Mr.  Miller  and 
the  body. 

Writing  on  the  7th  of  April,  he  referred  to  these  things 
as  follows : 

"  My  dear  Bro.  Himes  :  —  I  should  utterly  despair  of 
the  Second  Advent  cause,  were  it  not  evident,  by  its  past  and 
present  history,  that  God  is  for  us.  You  know,  my  dear 
brother,  there  was  a  time  when  you  and  I,  with  a  few  choice 

brethren,  stood  alone We  acknowledged  our 

weakness,  and  claimed  no  superiority  over  our  fellows.  We 
provoked  no  one  to  combat,  and  made  no  attack  on  the  pre- 
vailing or  popular  institutions  of  the  day ;  yet  they  began 
to  be  alarmed.  Why?  Because,  as  the  people  began  to 
hear  the  foolish  reports  of  our  enemies,  they  became  more 
and  more  anxious  to  know  what  these  things  meant.    .     .     . 

"  Among  the  many  pious  who  took  sides  with  us  wTere 
some  of  those  uneasy,  ever- changing,  unstable,  insubordi- 
nate, and  self-exalted  spirits,  who  stood  ready  to  jump  on 
and  ride  into  notice  and  power  the  moment  they  saw  how 
the  case  w7ould  go.  This  kind  of  spirits  have  always  seized 
the  reins  of  government,  are  never  satisfied  with  their 
present  position,  and  will  change  every  new  moon.  There 
are  many  of  this  class  among  us,  if  not  of  us,  at  the  present 
time,  who  are  trying  to  lead  away  followers  after  them. 

"  This  is  a  peculiar  time.  The  greatest  variety  of  fanciful 
interpretations  of  Scripture  are  now  being  presented  by  new 
luminaries,  reflecting  their  rays  of  light  and  heat  in  every 
direction.  Some  of  these  are  wandering  stars,  and  some 
emit  only  twilight.  I  am  sick  of  this  everlasting  changing  ; 
but,  my  dear  brother,  we  must  learn  to  have  patience.  If 
Christ  comes  this  spring,  we  shall  not  need  it  long ;  and  if 
he  comes  not,  we  shall  need  much  more.     I  am  prepared  for 


ANECDOTE.  299 

the  worst,  and  hope  for  the  best.  God  will  not  forsake  us, 
unless  we  forsake  him 

"  'It  is  a  small  thing  to  be  judged  of  man's  judgment/ 
says  the  apostle :  so  that  you  need  not  fear  man.  I  have 
often  been  consigned  to  perdition,  and  yet  I  have  a  blessed 
hope.  I  often  think,  when  I  hear  a  brother  judging  and 
condemning  another,  what  an  excellent  Pope  he  would  make. 
Therefore,  fear  them  not ;  for  if  we  judge  and  condemn  our 
brother,  we  are  making  ourselves  'judges  of  the  law,  rather 
than  doers  of  the  law.'      .     .     .  Wm.  Miller. 

"Low  Hampton,  April  7,  1845." 

In  connection  with  the  great  variety  of  views  received  by 
those  who  adhered  to  the  "  Shut  Door,"  there  was  issued  a 
great  variety  of  papers  attempting  to  sustain  them.  These, 
being  circulated  in  every  direction,  created  great  confusion, 
and  made  it  difficult  for  those  not  initiated  to  understand 
the  true  position  of  believers  in  the  Second  Advent.  This 
was  illustrated  by  the  following  anecdote  related  by  Mr. 
Miller. 

The  first  person  in  his  own  parish  who  fully  embraced  his 
views  was  an  old  woman,  an  humble,  praying  Christian ; 
and  she  continued  steadfast  in  the  faith  on  the  original  plat- 
form. She  was  in  humble  circumstances,  and,  not  being 
able  to  take  a  paper,  Mr.  Miller  sent  her  his  papers  when 
he  had  read  them. 

One  week  he  received  sixteen  different  sheets,  all  pur- 
porting to  be  Advent  publications,  but  the  most  of  them 
advocating  contradictory  sentiments.  After  he  had  ex- 
amined them,  he  sent  them  to  the  old  woman.  It  was  not 
long  before  he  had  a  special  message  from  her,  requesting 
his  immediate  presence. 

He  hastened  to  her  house,   not  knowing  but  something 
important  was  the  cause  of  the  summons.     On  his  arrival 
she  began : 

':  Have  you  read  all  these  papers  ?  " 

"  I  have  looked  them  over." 

"  But  are  they  all  Advent  papers  1  " 

"  They  profess  to  be." 

"  Well,  then,"  said  she,  "I  am  no  longer  an  Adventist 
I  shall  take  the  old  Bible,  and  stick  to  that." 
26* 


b 


300  LIFE    01   "WILLIAM   MILLER. 

"  But/'  said  Mr.  M..  "we  have  no  confidence  in  one 
half  there  is  advocated  in  those  papers.'* 

tl  We  !  "  exclaimed  the  old  lady.  "  who  is  we  ?-  " 
"Why,'3   replied  Mr.  M..    "ice  are   those   who   do  not 

fellowship  these  things." 

"  Well,  but  I  want  to  know  who  we  is." 

•'•  Why.  all  of  us  who  stand  on  the  old  ground.73 

i;  But  that  an't  telling  who  we  is.  I  want  to  know  who 
we  is.'* 

"  Well."  said  Mr.  Miller,  in  relating  the  story.  -  I  was 
confounded,  and  was  unable  to  give  her  any  information 
who  we  were." 

In  this  dilemma  it  was  considered  very  important,  on  the 
part  of  Mr.  Miller  and  his  friends,  to  define  their  position. 
and  to  ascertain  who  did  sympathize  with  their  views.  To 
determine  this,  a  Mutual  Conference  was  called,  to  assemble 
at  Albany.  N,  Y..  on  the  29th  of  April.  1845. 


CHAPTER    XXI. 

MUTUAL    CONFERENCE     AT     ALBANY  —  DECLARATION     OF     TRUSTIFIES 

PLAN  OF    OPERATIONS  —  ADDRESS  TO  THE  BRETHREN  —ACTION 

OF    THE    CONFERENCE    DEFENDED    BY    MR.    MILLER.    ETC. 

Ox  the  23d  of  April.  Mr.  Miller,  in  company  with  Mr. 
Himes.  visited  Albany,  and  commenced  a  course  of  lectures 
on  the  prophecies.  Mr.  M.  spoke  with  his  usual  clearness 
and  ability,  was  in  good  spirits,  and  was  listened  to  by  a 
large  and  respectful  audience. 

On  the  29th.  the  Conference  assembled  at  9  A.  vl.  at  the 
'•House  of  Prayer.r;  in  Grand  street.  After  singing,  and  a 
prayer  by  Mr.  Miller,  it  was  temporarily  organized  by  the 
choice  of  Mr.  Miller.  Chairman,  and  Mr.  Himes.  Secretary. 
who  stated  the  objects  for  which  the  Conference  had  been 
called,  namely.  ,:  to  consult  together  respecting  the  condition 
and  wants  of  brethren  in  the  several  sections  of  the  country  : 
that  we  may  be  better  enabled  to  act  in  concert,  and  with 
more  efficiency,  in  the  promulgation  of  Gospel  truths." 

After  the  names  and  residence  of  members  were  ascer- 


MUTUAL  CONFERENCE  AT  ALBANY.       301 

tained,  the  Conference  was  fully  organized  by  the  choice  of 
Rev.  Elon  Galusha,  of  Lockport,  N.  Y.,  President,  and 
S.  Bliss  and  0.  It.  Fassett,  Secretaries. 

A  committee  of  twelve,  consisting  of  William  Miller, 
Josiah  Litch,  N.  N.  Whiting,  J.  V.  Himes,  Sylvester  Bliss, 
L.  D.  Fleming,  Erastus  Parker,  H.  Caswell,  I.  R.  Gates, 
I.  H.  Shipman,  Prosper  Powell,  and  Elon  Galusha,  were 
appointed  to  arrange  business  for  the  action  of  the  Con- 
ference. While  they  were  thus  engaged,  the  others  were 
profitably  occupied  in  listening  to  statements  of  the  condition 
of  things  in  different  sections  of  the  country.  The  com- 
mittee reported,  in  part,  on  the  second  day,  and  in  full  on 
the  third  and  last  day  of  the  session,  as  follows  : 

REPORT  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  TO  THE  CONFERENCE. 

"  Your  committee,  appointed  for  the  purpose  of  taking 
into  consideration  the  great  principles  upon  which  we  can 
unite  and  act  in  advancing  the  cause  of  truth,  for  the  edifi- 
cation of  the  body  of  Christ,  the  salvation  of  souls,  and  the 
preparation  of  man  for  the  near  Advent  of  the  Saviour,  sub- 
mit the  following  report : 

"  In  view  of  the  many  conflicting  opinions,  unscriptural 
views,  leading  to  unseemly  practices,  and  the  sad  divisions 
which  have  been  thereby  caused  by  some  professing  to  be 
Adventists,  we  deem  it  incumbent  on  us  to  declare  to  the 
world  our  belief  that  the  Scriptures  teach,  among  others,  the 
following 

"  IMPORTANT  TRUTHS. 

"  1st.  That  the  heavens  and  earth  which  are  now,  by  the 
word  of  God,  are  kept  in  stoje,  reserved  unto  fire  against 
the  day  of  judgment  and  perdition  of  ungodly  men.  That 
the  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief  in  the  night,  in  the 
which  the  heavens  shall  pass  away  with  a  great  noise,  and 
the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat ;  the  earth  also, 
and  the  works  that  are  therein,  shall  be  burned  up.  That 
the  Lord  will  create  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,  wherein 
righteousness  —  that  is,  the  righteous  —  will  forever  dwell.1 
And  that  the  kingdom  and  the  dominion  under  the  whole 

1  2  Pet.  3  •  7,  10,  13. 


302  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

heaven  shall  be  given  to  the  people  of  the  saints  of  the 
Most  High,  whose  kingdom  is  an  everlasting  kingdom,  and 
all  dominions  shall  serve  and  obey  him.1 

2d.  That  there  are  but  two  advents  or  appearings  of  the 
Saviour  to  this  earth.2  That  both  are  personal  and  visible.3 
That  the  first  took  place  in  the  days  of  Herod,4  when  He 
wras  conceived  of  the  Holy  Ghost,5  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary,6 
went  about  doing  good,7  suffered  on  the  cross,  the  just  for 
the  unjust,8  died,9  was  buried,10  arose  again  the  third  day, 
the  firstfruits  of  them  that  slept,11  and  ascended  into  the 
heavens,12  which  must  receive  him  until  the  times  of  the 
restitution  of  all  things,  spoken  of  by  the  mouth  of  all  the 
holy  prophets.13  That  the  second  coming  or  appearing  will 
take  place  when  he  shall  descend  from  heaven,  at  the  sound- 
ing of  the  last  trump,  to  give  his  people  rest,14  being  revealed 
from  heaven  in  flaming  fire,  taking  vengeance  on  them  that 
know  not  God,  and  obey  not  the  Gospel.15  And  that  he  will 
judge  the  quick  and  the  dead  at  his  appearing  and  kingdom.16 

3d.  That  the  second  coming  or  appearing  is  indicated  to 
be  now  emphatically  nigh,  even  at  the  doors,17  by  the  chro- 
nology of  the  prophetic  periods,18  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy, ia 
and  the  signs  of  the  times.20  And  that  this  truth  should  be 
preached  both  to  saints  and  sinners,  that  the  first  may 
rejoice,  knowing  their  redemption  draweth  nigh,21  and  the 
last  be  warned  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come,22  before  the 
Master  of  the  house  shall  rise  up  and  shut  to  the  door.23 

4th.  That  the  condition  of  salvation  is  repentance  toward 
God,  and  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.24  And  that  those 
wrho  have  repentance  and  faith  will  live  soberly,  and  right- 
eously, and  godly,  in  this  present  world,  looking  for  that 
blessed  hope,  and  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God 
and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.25 

5th.  That  there  will  be  a  resurrection  of  the  bodies  of  all 

1  Dan.  7  :  27.  2  Heb.  9  :  28.  3  Acts  1  :  9,  11.  4  Mat.  2  :  1. 
5  Mat.  1  :  18.  6  Mat.  1 :  25.  7  Mat.  11:5.  8 1  Pet.  3  :  18.  9  Luke 
23  :  46.  10  Luke  23  :  53.  "  1  Cor.  15  :  4.  12  Luke  24  :  51.  13  Acts 
3  :  21.  14  1  Thes.  4  :  16,  17  ;  1  Cor.  15  :  52.  15  2  Thes.  1  :  7,  8. 
16  2  Tim.  4:1.  17  Mat.  24  :  33.  18  Dan.  7  :  25  ;  8  :  14  ;  9  :  24  ; 

12  :  7,  11,  12  ;  Key.  9  :  10,  15  ;  11  :  2,  3  ;  12  :  6,  14  ;,  13  :  5.  19  Dan. 
2d,  7th,  8th,  9th,  11th,  and  12th  chaps.;  Rev.  9th,  11th,  12th,  13th, 
14th,  and  17th  chaps.  20  Mat.  24  :  29;  Luke  21  :  25,  26.  2l  Luke 
21  :  28;  1  Thes.  4  :  18.  ^2  Cor.  5  :  11.  *  Luke  13  :  24,  25.  24  Acts 
20  :  21 ;  Mark  1:15.        25  Tit.  2  :  11—13. 


I 


MUTUAL  CONFERENCE  AT  ALBANY.        803 

the  dead,1  both  of  the  just  and  the  unjust.2  That  those 
who  are  Christ's  will  be  raised  at  his  coming.3  That  the 
rest  of  the  dead  will  not  live  again  until  after  a  thousand 
years.4  And  that  the  saints  shall  not  all  sleep,  but  shall  be 
changed  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  at  the  last  trump.5 

"  6th.  That  the  only  millennium  taught  in  the  Word  of 
God  is  the  thousand  years  which  are  to  intervene  between 
the  first  resurrection  and  that  of  the  rest  of  the  dead,  as  in- 
culcated in  the  20th  of  Revelation.6  And  that  the  various 
portions  of  Scripture  which  refer  to  the  millennial  state  are 
to  have  their  fulfilment  after  the  resurrection  of  all  the 
saints  who  sleep  in  Jesus.7 

'•  7th.  That  the  promise,  that  Abraham  should  be  the 
heir  of  the  world,  was  not  to  him,  or  to  his  seed,  through 
the  law,  but  through  the  righteousness  of  faith.8  That  they 
are  not  all  Israel  which  are  of  Israel.9  That  there  is  no 
difference,  under  the  Gospel  dispensation,  between  Jew  and 
Gentile.10  That  the  middle  wall  of  partition  that  was  be- 
tween them  is  broken  down,  no  more  to  be  rebuilt.11  That 
God  will  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  deeds.12 
That  if  we  are  Christ's,  then  are  we  Abraham's  seed,  and 
heirs  according  to  the  promise.13  And  that  the  only  res- 
toration of  Israel,  yet  future,  is  the  restoration  of  the  saints 
to  the  earth,  created  anew,  when  God  shall  open  the  graves 
of  those  descendants  of  Abraham  who  died  in  faith,  without 
receiving  the  promise,  with  the  believing  Gentiles  who  have 
been  grafted  in  with  them  into  the  same  olive  tree  ;  and 
shall  cause  them  to  come  up  out  of  their  graves,  and  bring 
them,  with  the  living,  who  are  changed,  into  the  land  of 
Israel.1* 

"  8th.  That  there  is  no  promise  of  this  world's  conver- 
sion.15 That  the  Horn  of  Papacy  will  war  with  the  saints, 
and  prevail  against  them,  until  the  Ancient  of  Days  shall 
come,  and  judgment  be  given  to  the  saints  of  the  Most 
High,  and  the  time  come  that  the  saints  possess  the  king- 
dom.16    That  the  children  of  the  kingdom,  and  the  children 

1  John  5  :  28,  29.        2  Acts  24  :  15.      3  1  Cor.  15  :  23.      4  Rev.  20  :  5. 
5  1  Cor.  15  :  51,  52.         6  Rev.  20  :  2—7.  7  Isa.  11  ;    35  :  1,  2S  5— 

10  ;  65  :  17—25.         8  Rom.  4:13.        9  Rom.  9:6.  10  Rom.  10  :  12. 

11  Eoh.  2  :  14,  15.  12  Rom.  2:6.  13  Gal.  3  :  29.  14  Ezek.  37  :  12  ; 
Heb.  11 :  12,  13  ;  Rom.  11  :  17  ;  John  5  :  28,  29.  15  Mat.  24  :  14. 
lsPan.  7:21,22. 


804  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

of  the  wicked  one,  will  continue  together  until  the  end  of 
the  world,  when  all  things  that  offend  shall  be  gathered  out 
of  the  kingdom,  and  the  righteous  shall  shine  forth  as  the 
sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father.1  That  the  Man  of  Sin 
will  only  be  destroyed  by  the  brightness  of  Christ's  coming.2 
And  that  the  nations  of  those  which  are  saved  and  redeemed 
to  God  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  out  of  every  kindred,  and 
tongue,  and  people,  and  nation,  will  be  made  kings  and 
priests  unto  God,  to  reign  forever  on  the  earth.3 

"9th.  That  it  is  the  duty  of  the  ministers  of  the  Word 
to  continue  in  the  work  of  preaching  the  Gospel  to  every 
creature,  even  unto  the  end,*  calling  upon  them  to  repent, 
in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand  ; 5 
that  their  sins  may  be  blotted  out  when  the  times  of  refresh- 
ing shall  come  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord.6 

And,  10th.  That  the  departed  saints  do  not  enter  their 
inheritance,  or  receive  their  crowns,  at  death."  That  they 
without  us  cannot  be  made  perfect.8  That  their  inheritance, 
incorruptible  and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away,  is 
reserved  in  heaven,  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  lost  time.9 
That  there  are  laid  up  for  them  and  us  crowns  of  righteous- 
ness, which  the  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge,  shall  give  at  the 
day  of  Christ  to  all  that  love  his  appearing.10  That  they 
will  only  be  satisfied  when  they  awake  in  Christ's  likeness.11 
And  that,  when  the  Son  of  Man  shall  come  in  his  glory, 
and  all  the  holy  angels  with  him.  the  King  will  say  to  those 
on  his  right  hand,  ;  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit 
the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world.'  u  Then  they  will  be  equal  to  the  angels,  being  the 
children  of  God  and  of  the  resurrection.13 

':  ASSOCIATED    ACTION. 

u*V\re  are  induced,  from  present  circumstances  affecting 
our  spiritual  interests,  to  present,  for  your  consideration,  a 
few  ideas  touching  associated  action. 

"  Order  is  Heaven's  first  law.  All  things  emanating 
from    God   are  constituted  on  principles  of  perfect  order. 

1  Mat.  13  :  87—43.  2  2  Tlies.  2:8.  3  Rev.  5  :  9,   10  ;  21  :  24. 

4  Mat.  28  :  19,  20.  5  Rev.  14  :  7.  6  Acts  3  :  19  :  20.  T  Dan.  12  : 
13  ;  Rev.  6  :  9—11  ;  Rom.  8  :  22,  23.  s  Heb.  11  :  40.  9 1  Pet.  1  :  4,  5. 
10  2  Tim.  4:3.  u  Ps.  17  :  15.         12  Mat.  25  :  34.         13  Luke  20  :  30. 


MUTUAL   CONFERENCE  AT  ALBANY.  305 

The  New  Testament  rules  for  the  government  of  the  Church 
we  regard  as  binding  on  the  whole  brotherhood  of  Christ. 
No  circumstances  can  justify  us  in  departing  from  the 
usages  established  by  Christ  and  his  Apostles. 

••  We  regard  any  congregation  of  believers,  who  habitually 
assemble  for  the  worship  of  God  and  the  due  observance  of 
the  Gospel  ordinances,  as  a  Church  of  Christ.  As  such,  it 
is  an  independent  body,  accountable  only  to  the  great  Head 
of  the  Church.  To  all  such  we  recommend  a  careful  ex- 
amination of  the  Scriptures,  and  the  adoption  of  such  prin- 
ciples of  association  and  order  as  are  in  accordance  there- 
with, that  they  may  enjoy  the  advantages  of  that  church 
relation  which  Christ  has  instituted. 

"  PLAN    OF    OPERATIONS. 

"In  the  midst  of  our  disappointed  hopes  of  seeing  the 
King  of  Glory,  and  being  made  like  him,  and  still  finding 
ourselves  in  a  world  of  sin;  snares,  and  death,  the  question 
forces  itself  upon  us, 

"  What  now  is  oar  work  ? 

uTo  us  it  seems  clear  that  our  first  work  is  to  make 
straight  paths  for  our  feet,  lest  that  which  is  lame  be  turned 
out  of  the  way.  We  are  in  duty  bound  to  give  the  house- 
hold meat  in  due  season,  and  to  build  ourselves  up  in  our 
most  holy  faith.  While  doing  this,  we  are  to  continue,  in 
obedience  to  the  great  commission,  to  preach  the  Gospel  to 
every  creature  :  so  long  as  the  love  of  Christ  dwells  in  us,  it 
will  constrain  us.  We  shall  not  be  released,  while  in  our 
present  state,  from  our  obligations  to  be  {  workers,  together 
with  God/  in  saving  those  for  whom  the  Redeemer  died. 
It  is  evident  that  the  duty,  which  of  right  devolves  on  every 
minister  of  the  Gospel,  of  proclaiming  the  hour  of  God's 
judgment,  is,  if  performed  at  all,  to  be  done  by  those  who 
are  convinced  of  its  truth.  Shall  we  continue  to  do  it,  or 
shall  it  be  left  undone  ?  And  if  we  continue  to  work  in  this 
peculiar  department  of  the  Lord's  vineyard,  what  system  of 
operations  shall  we  adopt  for  carrying  forward  our  work  ? 
On  this  point  we  feel  that  we  have  need  of  great  wisdom 
and  prudence. 

"  In  sounding  the  alarm  through  the  length  and  breadth 


806  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

of  the  land,  and  awakening  a  general  interest  on  the 
subject  of  the  Lord's  speedy  coming,  and  its  kindred 
doctrines,  our  camp-meetings  have  been  of  incalculable  im- 
portance, and,  in  many  instances,  have  accomplished  much 
good.  But  that  peculiar  work  seems  to  have  been  per- 
formed, and  a  new  aspect  presents  itself.  What  we  now  do 
must  be  done  more  by  dint  of  persevering  and  determined 
effort  than  by  moving  the  masses  of  community. 

"We  would,  therefore,  advise  that  our  mode  of  operation, 
in  this  respect,  be  varied  so  as  to  meet  the  exigencies  of  the 
times,  and  are  of  the  opinion  that  our  camp-meetings,  except 
in  particular  cases,  where  the  brethren  deem  it  will  advance 
the  cause,  should  be  dispensed  with  for  the  present,  and  our 
energies  expended  by  visiting  the  towns  and  villages,  and  in 
some  convenient  place  giving  courses  of  lectures,  and  holding 
series  of  conferences.  By  this  we  think  our  means  could  be 
better  husbanded,  and  fewer  laborers  could  carry  on  the 
meetings,  and  thus  a  wider  field  be  occupied. 

"  We  would  also  take  the  liberty  of  urging  the  importance 
of  a  wider  circulation  of  our  books  and  periodicals.  These 
have  been,  and  may  still  be,  the  means  of  great  good  to  the 
community ;  and  many  may  thus  yet  be  reached  who  have 
not  listened  to  the  public  lectures.  Especially  is  it  import- 
ant at  the  present  time  to  spread  widely  those  which  relate 
particularly  to  the  personal  appearing  of  Christ,  the  resur- 
rection of  the  body,  the  return  of  the  Jews,  kc.     .     .     . 

"  Nor  can  we  think  ourselves  justified  in  neglecting  Sab- 
bath-schools and  Bible-class  instruction.  We  would  suggest 
to  each  congregation  the  necessity  of  opening  a  Sabbath- 
school  for  the  benefit  of  at  least  their  own  children,  and  as 
many  more  as  can  be  induced  to  attend.  If  the  beginning  is 
small,  perseverance  will  accomplish  the  object. 

"  In  all  our  labors  we  cannot  be  too  deeply  impressed  with 
the  sentiments  of  Paul,  addressed  to  Timothy,  his  son  in  the 
gospel.  '  The  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strive,  but  be 
gentle  toward  all  men, —  apt  to  teach,  patient ;  in  meekness 
instructing  those  who  oppose  themselves,  if  God  peradventure 
may  give  them  repentance  to  the  acknowledging  of  the  truth, 
and  they  may  recover  themselves  out  of  the  snare  of  the 
devil,  who  are  taken  captive  by  him  at  his  will.' 

"  In  conclusion,  permit  us  to  add  the  following  resolutions : 


MUTUAL  CONFERENCE  AT  ALBANY.        60  I 

u  Resolved,  That  this  Conference,  while  it  sympathizes 
with  every  Scripture  effort  to  save  men  from  sin,  and  pre- 
pare them,  by  grace,  for  the  Kingdom  of  God, —  and  while 
it  bids  god-speed  to  the  publication  of  the  gospel  to  every 
creature  in  the  world, —  yet  it  feels  bound,  by  the  most 
solemn  considerations  possible,  to  oppose,  to  the  utmost  of 
its  power,  that  fatal  and  delusive  doctrine  of  modern  days, 
namely,  that  the  Scripture  warrants  the  belief,  or  even  the 
hope,  that,  before  the  second  glorious  and  personal  appear- 
ing of  Christ,  to  glorify  his  saints  and  renew  the  earth,  the 
world,  or  even  a  majority  of  it,  will  be  converted  to  Christ. 
And,  1st.  We  deem  it  ant i- Scriptural. —  opposed  to  all 
that  class  of  scriptures  which  represents  the  church  as  in  a 
state  of  warfare  and  suffering  until  her  deliverer  —  Christ  — 
comes, —  all  those  scriptures  which  declare  the  coexistence 
and  the  mingling  of  the  righteous  and  wricked,  even  to  the 
end  of  the  w7orld, —  all  those  passages  wThich  represent  the 
continuance  of  the  Man  of  Sin,  the  little  horn  of  the  fourth 
beast  in  Daniel's  vision,  the  great  dragon  power,  &c,  as 
existing  till  the  personal  advent  of  the  Saviour,  to  destroy 
them  that  destroy  the  earth,  and  to  reward  his  saints.  2d. 
We  deem  it  dangerous  to  the  eternal  interests  of  men.  It 
holds  out  to  them  the  hope  that  a  period  more  conducive  to 
piety  than  the  present  is  before  them  ;  thus  inducing,  how- 
ever unintentionally,  the  sinner  to  defer  immediate  repent- 
ance, and  encouraging  professors  to  wait  for  a  more  favorable 
opportunity  to  expend  their  energies  for  saving  sinners,  both 
at  home  and  abroad.  And,  finally,  its  direct  influence  is  to 
put  far  off  the  second  advent  of  the  Saviour,  and  thus  lull 
the  world  into  a  state  of  carelessness  with  respect  to  an  im- 
mediate preparation  for  the  event.  There  can  be  no  millen- 
nium until  the  first  resurrection,  the  resurrection  of  the  just. 

"  Resolved,  ThatwTe  consider  the  doctrine  of  the  restora- 
tion of  the  natural  Jews,  as  a  nation,  either  before  or  after 
the  second  advent  of  Christ,  as  heirs  and  inheritors  of  the 
land  of  Canaan,  as  subversive  of  the  whole  gospel  system,  by 
raising  up  what  Christ  has  broken  down  —  namely,  the  mid- 
dle wall  of  partition  between  the  Jew  and  Gentile.  It  contra- 
dicts those  declarations  of  the  New  Testament  which  assert 
i  there  is  no  difference  between  the  Jew  and  the  Greek ; ' 
that  '  the  promise  that  he  shall  be  heir  of  the  world  was  not 
27 


308  LIFE    OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

to  Abraham  and  his  seed  through  the  law.  but  through  the 
righteousness  of  faith :  '  and  that  •  there  is  neither  Jew 
nor  Gentile,  bond  nor  free,  male  nor  female.'  but  that,  'if 
we  are  Christ's,  then  are  we  Abraham's  seed,  and  heirs  ac- 
cording to  the  promise.'  For  this  Judaizing  doctrine  claims 
there  is  a  difference  between  the  Jew  and  the  Greek :  that 
the  children  of  the  flesh  are  accounted  for  the  seed :  that 
there  still  is  the  distinction  of  Jew  and  Gentile  :  that  we 
do  henceforth  know  men  after  the  flesh.  &c.  We  feel  bound. 
therefore,  as  we  value  the  fundamental  principles  of  the 
gospel,  to  enter  our  most  solemn  protest  against  all  such 
teachings ;  and  in  our  public  services  we  will  endeavor  to 
meet,  in  the  spirit  of  love  and  meekness,  this  error,  and  ex- 
pose its  gross  absurdity :  while,  at  the  same  time,  we  will 
proclaim  to  all,  both  Jew  and  Gentile,  the  message  found  in 
the  commission  given  by  the  Great  Head  of  the  Church  — 
1  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved,  and 
he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned,'  And  *  Whoso- 
ever calleth  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved/' 

'•'Whereas,  in  every  great  religious  movement,  there  have 
been,  among  the  wise  and  sober-minded  advocates  of  the 
truth,  others  who  have  risen  up,  striving  about  words  to  no 
profit,  but  to  the  subverting  of  the  hearers :  making  great 
pretensions  to  special  illumination  ;  indulging  in  many  evil 
practices :  creeping  into  houses,  and  leading  captive  silly 
women  ;  laden  with  sins,  led  away  with  divers  lusts,  ever 
learning  and  never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth  :  men  of  corrupt  minds  and  reprobate  concerning  the 
faith,  who  will  not  endure  sound  doctrine,  but  after  their 
own  lusts  heap  to  themselves  teachers  having  itching  ears ; 
turning  their  ears  away  from  the  truth,  and  turning  unto 
fables  ;  and  who  walk  disorderly,  working  not  at  all,  but  are 
busy-bodies,  for  the  cause  of  whom  the  way  of  truth  is  evil 
spoken  of;  and,  whereas,  in  connection  with  the  doctrine  of 
Christ's  near  appearing,  as  in  all  previous  religious  move- 
ments, some  of  this  class  have  risen  up.  calling  them- 
selves Adventists.  teaching  for  doctrines  that  with  which  we 
can  have  no  sympathy  or  fellowship,  with  many  unseemly 
practices,  whereby  the  word  of  God  has  been  dishonored, 
and  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  appearing  brought  into  contempt; 
therefore  — 


MUTUAL   CONFERENCE   AT  ALBANY.  309 

"  Resolved,  That  we  can  have  no  sympathy  or  fellowship 
with  those  things  which  have  only  a  show  of  wisdom  in  will- 
worship  and  neglecting  of  the  body,  after  the  commandments 
and  doctrines  of  men.  That  we  have  no  fellowship  with  any 
of  the  new  tests  as  conditions  of  salvation,  in  addition  to 
repentance  toward  God  and  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  a  looking  for  and  loving  his  appearing.  That  we  have 
no  fellowship  for  Jewish  fables  and  commandments  of  men, 
that  turn  from  the  truth,  or  for  any  of  the  distinctive  char- 
acteristics of  modern  Judaism.  And  that  the  act  of  promis- 
cuous feet- washing  and  the  salutation  kiss,  as  practised  by 
some  professing  Adventists  as  religious  ceremonies,  sitting 
on  the  floor  as  an  act  of  voluntary  humility,  shaving  the 
head  to  humble  one's  self,  and  acting  like  children  in  under- 
standing, are  not  only  unscriptural,  but  subversive,  if  per- 
severed in,  of  purity  and  morality. 

£:And  whereas  our  congregations  have  suffered  greatly 
from  persons  who  have  called  themselves  to  the  ministry 
and  taught  errors,  and  by  smooth  words  and  fair  speeches 
have  deceived  the  hearts  of  the  simple  and  led  them  astray ; 
therefore  — 

11  Resolved,  That  we  recommend  to  our  brethren  to  en- 
courage those  men  only  who  give  evidence  that  they  are 
called  of  God  to  the  work ;  who  are  of  good  behavior ;  who 
abstain  from  all  appearance  of  evil ;  who  are  vigilant,  sober, 
apt  to  teach,  not  greedy  of  filthy  lucre,  no  brawlers,  not 
covetous ;  men  who  will  teach  the  unadulterated  word  of  God, 
and,  by  manifestation  of  the  truth,  commend  themselves  to 
every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God. 

"  (Signed  in  behalf  of  the  Committee,) 

"William  Miller,  Chairman. " 

The  above,  after  a  full  discussion  and  careful  examina- 
tion, was  unanimously  adopted ;  as  was  also,  from  the  pen 
of  Mr.  Miller,  the  following 

ADDRESS   TO  THE   BRETHREN. 

"  The  present  state  of  our  faith  and  hope,  wTith  the  severe 
trials  which  many  of  us  experience,  call  for  much  brotherly 
love,  forbearance,  patience,  and  prayer.  No  cause,  be  it 
ever  so  holy,  can  exist  in  this  present  world,  without  its  at- 


310  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM  MILLER. 

tendant  evils.  Therefore,  it  becomes  necessary  for  all  who 
are  connected  with  this  cause  to  exercise  great  charity ;  for 
charity  covers  a  multitude  of  sins. 

"  The  cause  we  advocate  calls  upon  all  men  to  read  the 
Word  of  God.  and  to  reason,  judge,  compare,  and  digest  for 
themselves.  This  is  certainly  right,  and  is  the  privilege  of 
all  rational  members  of  the  community.  Yet  this  very  liberty 
may  become  a  stumbling-block  to  many,  and,  without 
charity,  be  the  means  of  scattering,  dividing,  and  causing 
contention  among  brethren.  Human  nature  is  such,  that 
those  who  are  governed  by  a  desire  to  rule  over  others  will 
seize  the  reins,  and  think  all  must  bow  to  their  decision ; 
while  others  will  think  such  unfit  for  the  station  they  as- 
sume. James  foresaw  the  evils  under  wrhich  we  labor,  and 
gives  us  a  caution  in  his  third  chapter,  to  which  we  shall  do 
well  to  take  heed.  Our  present  difficulties  arise  more  from  the 
multiplicity  of  masters  and  leaders  among  us  (some  of  whom 
are  governed  by  carnal  motives),  than  from  any  want  of 
light.  The  word  of  God  affords  light  enough  to  guide  us 
in  all  cases,  '  that  the  man  of  God  may  be  perfect, 
thoroughly  furnished  unto  every  good  work.'  But  among  the 
thousand-and-one  expositions  of  Scripture,  which  are  every 
day  being  palmed  upon  us,  some  of  them,  at  least,  must  be 
wrong.  Many  of  them  are  so  weak  and  silly  that  they 
bring  a  stigma  on  the  blessed  Book,  confuse  the  mind  of  the 
inquirer  after  truth,  and  divide  the  children  of  God. 

"  To  remedy  this  evil,  we  must  learn  to  judge  men  and 
principles  by  their  fruits,  and  not  be  too  hasty  in  receiving 
the  expositions  which  may  be  presented  by  every  pretender 
to  wisdom  and  sanctity.  Any  exposition  of  Scripture  which 
conflicts  with  other  texts  must  be  spurious.  Any  man  whose 
object  is  to  obtain  followers  must  be  avoided.  Whatever 
produces  envy  and  strife,  brethren,  is  of  the  devil ;  and  we 
must  resist  his  temptations  in  their  beginning.  If  God  has 
been  with  us  from  the  commencement  of  our  illumination 
respecting  the  hope  of  His  glorious  appearing,  shall  we  aban- 
don the  truth  wherein  our  souls  have  been  comforted,  and 
our  brotherly  love  established,  for  fables  ?  We  ought  to  be 
careful  lest  we  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit.  How  did  we  receive 
this  doctrine  at  first?  Was  it  not  by  searching  the  word  of 
God,  and  a  careful  comparison  of  Scripture  with  Scripture  I 
Yes ;  our  faith  did  not  rest  on  the  word  of  man.     We  then 


MUTUAL  CONFERENCE  AT  ALBANY.       311 

required  chapter  and  verse,  or  we  would  not  believe.  Why 
should  we  leave  our  former  rule  of  faith,  to  follow  the  vain 
and  changing  opinions  of  men  ?  Some  are  neglecting  the 
lamp,  and  seeking  to  walk  by  sparks  of  their  own  kin- 
dling. There  is  a  propensity  in  many  to  make  all  prophecy 
apply  to  our  time  and  country.  Others  have  split  on  this 
rock.  Some  of  the  best  writers  and  commentators  have  thus 
erred.  They  have,  in  many  instances,  considered  themselves, 
their  sect,  or  their  nation,  as  the  peculiar  favorites  of  Heaven  ; 
and  have  therefore  often  failed  to  apply  prophecy  aright. 
An  Englishman,  writing  on  prophecy,  will  make  the  English 
territory  the  principal  place  of  action  —  the  Frenchman, 
France  —  the  German,  Germany  —  and  an  American,  the 
United  States.  So  is  it  with  all  sectarians.  When  minds 
are  contracted  by  selfishness  and  bigotry,  they  lose  sight  of 
the  glory  of  God.  and  his  word,  and  seek  only  their  own 
glory.  On  the  other  hand,  they  neglect,  if  they  do  not 
actually  reject,  such  parts  of  the  oracles  of  God  as  militate 
against  their  views,  and  rush  headlong  into  error.  If  we  are 
thus  liable  to  be  deceived  by  the  cunning  craftiness  of  men, 
we  ought  to  be  cautious  how  we  are  led  by  every  fanciful 
interpretation  of  Scripture.  Let  us  then  be  more  wary,  and, 
like  the  noble  Bereans,  search  the  Scriptures  daily,  to  see 
whether  these  things  are  so.  Then,  if  we  err,  we  shall  have 
the  consolation  that  we  have  made  a  careful  examination  of 
the  subject,  and  that  the  error  was  one  of  the  head,  and  not 
of  the  heart.  Christians  should  receive  no  evidence  but  the 
testimony  of  God  as  a  ground  of  faith. 

"We  are  commanded  to  be  sober,  and  hope  to  the  end  for 
that  grace  which  is  to  be  brought  unto  us  at  the  revelation 
of  Jesus  Christ,  Our  disappointment,  as  to  the  time,  should 
have  no  effect  on  our  hope.  *  We  know  that  Christ  has  not 
yet  been  revealed,  and  the  object  of  our  hope  is  yet  in  the 
future.  Therefore,  if  we  believe  in  God's  word,  as  we  pro- 
fess, we  ought  to  be  thankful  for  the  trial  of  our  faith. 

•:  We  shall  not  have  to  wait  long  for  the  glorious  appear- 
ing of  Christ.  Therefore,  let  us  lift  up  our  heads  and  rejoice, 
knowing  that  our  redemption  draweth  nigh.  We  regret  to 
see  any  impatience  manifested  among  the  friends  of  Jesus. 
God  is  now  trying  our  graces.  How  solemn  the  thought, 
that  any  should  lose  the  crown  when  near  the  goal !  Let 
27* 


312  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

us  arise,  shake  off  our  dulness.  redouble  our  diligence,  let 
all  the  world  know  there  is  such  a  grace  as  Christian  perse- 
verance, and  let  all  see  that  we  are  truly  seeking  a  better 
country.  Can  it  be  possible,  after  we  have  run  well  for  a 
season,  loved  the  appearing  of  Jesus,  come  to  a  time  when 
we  must  expect  him.  and  should  be  ready  to  cast  ourselves 
into  his  arms,  that  we  shall  go  back,  or  again  strike  hands 
with  a  thoughtless  world  3  May  God  forbid  !  Let  us  then 
go  forward.  It  is  death  to  go  back  ;  to  go  forward  can  be 
no  more. 

■  •  We  are  pained  to  see  a  disposition  to  murmur  against 
those  who  have  been  pioneers  in  the  war,  —  who  have  sacri- 
ficed all  earthly  considerations  to  support  a  truth  so  unpop- 
ular as  the  second  advent  and  personal  reign  of  Jesus  Christ. 

••Brethren,  shun  such  as  cause  divisions  among  very 
friends.  Remember  the  admonition  of  James  :  :  Grudge  not 
one  against  another,  brethren,  lest  ye  be  condemned  :  behold, 
the  Judge  standeth  at  the  door/'  We  see.  by  this  rule,  that 
when  a  brother  loses  his  fellowship  for  the  saints,  he  is  cer- 
tainly in  darkness.  We  must  be  careful  not  to  follow  what 
he  may  term  'light.'  Love  for  brethren  is  a  test  of  our 
interest  in  Christ,  without  which  all  gifts,  and  works,  are 
like  sounding  brass,  and  a  tinkling  cymbal.  Let  us  cultivate, 
with  peculiar  care,  this  loveliest  of  all  Christian  graces,  and 
frown  on  the  man  who  attempts  to  cause  division.  '  Offences 
must  needs  come,  but  woe  to  that  man  by  whom  the  offence 
cometh  ! '  What  can  we  say  more,  to  stir  up  your  pure  minds 
by  way  of  remembrance  ? 

"We  would,  therefore,  recommend  more  study  of  the 
Scriptures,  and  less  writing,  and  that  we  be  careful  not  to 
submit  to  public  inspection  mere  speculations  until  they  are 
closely  scrutinized  by  some  judicious  friend.  Thus  we  shall 
avoid  many  errors.  We  should  always  be  more  jealous  of 
ourselves  than  of  others.  Self-love  is  the  strongest,  most 
dangerous  and  deceitful  foe  that  we  meet  in  our  Christian  war- 
fare. We  have  arrived  at  a  period  of  deep  interest  and  peril. 
It  is  interesting,  because  the  evidence  of  the  Saviour  being  at 
the  door  is  plain,  so  that  no  sincere  student  of  prophecy  can 
be  at  a  loss  to  know  that  that  day,  for  which  all  other  days 
were  made,  is  near.  How  interesting  to  live  in  expectation 
of  the  day  which  patriarchs,  prophets  and  apostles,  desired  to 
see,  but  died  without  the  sight !      Persecution  and  death 


MUTUAL  CONFERENCE  AT  ALBANY.       313 

lose  their  sting,  in  prospect  of  the  coming  Conqueror,  who 
hath  all  power,  and  who  hath  engaged  to  put  all  enemies 
under  his  feet.  We  need  not  murmur ;  for,  in  this  our  day, 
God  will  bring  to  pass  this  act.  this  (to  the  worldly  man) 
strange  act,  for  which  all  the  weary  saints,  for  six  thousand 
years,  have  lived  and  prayed.  We  entreat  you  to  hold  fast 
the  confidence,  which  you  have  had  in  the  word  of  God,  unto 
the  end.  '  Yet  a  little  while,  and  he  that  shall  come  will 
come,  and  will  not  tarry.'  '  Here  is  the  patience  and  the 
faith  of  the  saints.'  4  Be  ye  also  patient;  stablish  your 
hearts,  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh.' 

"  Wm.  Miller,  Chairman  of  Committee" 

Thus  harmoniously  terminated  a  Conference,  very  fully 
attended,  and  congregated  under  circumstances  of  peculiar 
interest,  in  view  of  many  conflicting  opinions,  with  great 
forebodings  as  to  the  result.  The  best  of  feeling  prevailed, 
and  great  calmness  and  patience  characterized  their  delibera- 
tions. Everything  adopted  by  the  Conference  was  carefully 
examined  in  full  meeting,  and  each  separate  item  unanimously 
received,  and  then  the  whole  without  a  dissenting  voice. 

Mr.  Miller,  in  relating  the  story  of  his  inability  to  con- 
vince the  old  lady  who  utve"  were,  remarked  that  he  went 
to  the  Albany  Conference  with  a  heavy  heart,  fearing  dis- 
union and  conflicting  views;  but  was  there  cheered  and 
strengthened  anew  by  the  unanimity  and  harmony  that  pre- 
vailed. And  he  was  "  rejoiced  that  so  goodly  a  number  had 
thus  united  in  making  known  to  the  world  who  and  what  we 
were."  He  returned  to  Low  Hampton,  and  the  old  lady 
referred  to  soon  had  an  opportunity  to  read  the  doings  at 
Albany.  The  first  time  she  again  saw  Mr.  Miller,  she 
grasped  his  hand,  and  exclaimed ; 

"  I  have  found  out  who  we  is ;  and  I  shall  still  be  an  Ad- 
ventist,  and  stand  by  the  old  ship." 

"And  I  am  glad,"  said  he,  in  narrating  it,  "that  you 
have  told  the  world  who  you  are.  And  if  anybody  wishes 
to  know  where  I  am,  I  wish  to  let  them  know  that  I  am  with 
you  who  approve  of  the  doings  of  that  Conference,  and  have 
told  the  world  what  you  are." 

The  doings  of  that  Conference  gave  great  satisfaction  to  all 
of  the  consistent  Adventists,  but  mortally  offended  those  who 


314  LIFE    OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

had  taken  new  positions,  and  sought  to  lead  away  disciples 
after  them.  It  was  so  much  misrepresented  and  opposed 
that  Mr.  Miller,  a  few  weeks  subsequently,  came  out,  over 
his  own  name,  in  its  defence,  as  follows  : 


"  Dear  Brother  Himes  :  —  I  wish  to  make  a  few  re- 
marks respecting  the  doings  of  the  Albany  Conference. 

"  While  nine- tenths  that  I  have  conversed  with  highly 
approve  of  the  doings  of  that  Conference,  some  do  not  discern 
clearly  the  motives  which  actuated  those  who  there  assembled, 
or  understand  fully  the  import  of  the  conclusions  arrived  at. 
That  some  would  seek  to  find  fault  with  the  deliberations  of 
those  who  there  represented  our  brethren  in  the  different 
sections  of  the  land,  we  had  reason  to  expect ;  but  all  who 
are  sincere  inquirers  after  truth  will  desire  to  advance  the 
cause  of  God  by  inducing  c  brethren  to  dwell  together  in 
unity,'  '  endeavoring  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the 
bond  of  peace/  '  till  we  come  in  the  unity  of  the  faith,  and 
of  the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God,  unto  a  perfect  man, 
unto  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ ; 
that  we  be  no  more  children,  tossed  to  and  fro,  and  carried 
about  with  every  wind  of  doctrine,  by  the  sleight  of  men, 
and  cunning  craftiness,  whereby  they  lie  in  wait  to  deceive ; 
but  speaking  the  truth  in  love,  may  grow  up  into  him  in  all 
things  which  is  the  head,  even  Christ.'  Those,  therefore, 
who  desire  to  be  set  right,  if  they  err  at  first,  on  seeing  the 
subject  in  its  true  light,  will  be  prompt  to  plant  themselves 
on  the  side  of  truth  and  righteousness.  All  others  will  be 
expected,  of  course,  to  walk  in  their  own  ways,  and,  if  pos- 
sible, draw  away  followers  after  them.  It  is,  therefore,  my 
present  purpose  to  answer  the  objections  of  all  honest  minds 
against  those  proceedings,  so  that  all  such  may  be  free  from 
any  embarrassment  respecting  it. 

"  And,  1st.  What  was  the  cause  of  the  assembling  of 
that  Conference  7  It  need  not  be  replied  that  it  was  con- 
vened to  deliberate  respecting,  and,  if  possible,  to  extricate 
ourselves  from  the  anarchy  and  confusion  of  the  \  BABY- 
LON' in  which  we  had  so  unexpectedly  found  ourselves. 
Notice  of  the  proposed   convention  had   been  extensively 


OBJECTIONS   CONSIDERED.  315 

given ;  all  bad  been  invited  to  be  represented  there  who  had 
the  good  of  the  cause  at  heart ;  and  the  brethren  came  to- 
gether there  from  all  parts  of  our  land. 

"  2d.  The  doings  of  the  Conference.  Everything 
which  could  not  meet  the  unanimous  approval  of  all  present 
was  promptly  stricken  out ;  and  had  there  been  a  dissenting 
voice  on  the  passage  of  any  act,  such  act  would  have  been 
promptly  reconsidered.  The  determination  was  to  do  noth- 
ing but  what  all,  in  view  of  all  the  circumstances,  could  fully 
approve.  And  it  was  taken  for  granted  that  all  who  did  not 
meet  with  that  body,  or  were  not  represented  there,  either 
stood  aloof  from  them  from  a  want  of  sympathy,  or  else  were 
willing  to  acquiesce  in  the  conclusions  of  those  who  should 
there  assemble ;  for  if  any  wished  to  be  identified  with  those 
brethren,  and  feared  their  deliberations  might  be  actuated  by 
wrong  counsels,  duty  —  imperious  duty  —  required  that  all 
such  should  be  present  to  counsel,  to  advise,  and  to  instruct 
those  who  should  be  in  danger  of  erring  in  any  way  from  the 
teachings  of  the  gospel. 

"But  the  Conference  assembled;  and  witness  the  har- 
mony, the  unanimity,  the  freedom  from  all  contention  and 
strife, —  the  full  discussion  and  examination  to  which  every 
act  was  subjected.  In  view  of  all  this,  will  any  say  that 
those  dear  brethren  had  not  the  cause  of  God  at  heart ;  that 
they  did  not  weigh  well  the  evils  they  would  remedy,  or  the 
means  of  their  removal,  or  did  not  desire  to  act  in  view  of 
the  common  good  of  the  children  of  God  ?  And  when  those 
who  were  absent  fancy  they  see  difficulties  in  the  results 
arrived  at,  as  they  were  not  present  to  hear  the  reasons 
advanced,  ought  they  not  to  be  very  careful,  and  cautiously 
to  inquire  if  they  have  a  full  understanding  of  the  exact  state 
of  the  case,  before  they  throw  in  a  fire-brand  to  divide  and 
distract  the  brethren,  and  thus  to  defeat  the  very  end  for 
which  that  Conference  assembled  ? 

"  3d.  Objections  to  the  doings  of  the  Conference. 
The  name  '  Adventists'  is  objected  to  as  a  sectarian  name ; 
and  it  is  claimed  that,  instead  of  being  called  an  Advent 
Church,  we  should  be  called  '  The  Church  of  God.'  This 
is,  in  my  opinion,  a  misconception  of  terms.  I  should 
oppose  our  being  called,'  in  an  associated  capacity,  a  church 
with  any  name.     The  Conference  at  Albany  made  no  pro- 


316  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

vision  for  calling  churches  by  any  distinctive  appellation. 
They  merely  expressed  themselves  as  regarding  '  any  congre- 
gation of  believers  who  habitually  assemble  for  the  worship 
of  God,  and  the  due  observance  of  the  gospel  ordinances,  as  a 
church  of  Christ.'  They  designed  to  prefix  or  afiBx  to  it  no 
appellative  whatever.  To  call  any  denomination  the  Advent 
Church,  the  Church  of  God.  or  any  other  name,  I  regard  as 
contrary  to  the  usage  of  the  apostles. 

"  All  true  churches  are  '  churches  of  God/  1  Thess.  2  : 
14 ;  '  churches  of  Christ/  1  Cor.  11  :  16  ;  '  churches  of  the 
saints/  1  Cor.  14  :  33.  They  are  thus  called  in  the  Scrip- 
tures ;  but  they  are  not  thus  called  as  distinctive  appella- 
tions ;  neither  have  we  the  right  to  choose  either  of  those  as 
a  specific  term.  And  if  we  wished  to  select  either  of  those 
terms,  by  which  to  be  designated,  which  should  we  select  ? 
The  Winebrennarians  of  Pennsylvania  call  themselves  '  The 
Church  of  God/  as  a  denominational  term.  If  we  were  also 
to  be  known  as  such,  we  should  be  confounded  with  them. 
But  we  have  no  right  to  take  a  name  that  belongs  generally 
to  the  whole  family,  and  apply  it  exclusively  to  a  branch  of 
the  family.  If  a  branch  of  the  family  wish  for  a  distinctive 
appellation,  they  must  apply  to  themselves  a  term  significant 
of  what  they  are.  But  I  contend  that  no  name  should  be 
applied  to  the  churches  as  such. 

"  A  church,  according  to  the  Scriptures,  is  a  religious 
assembly,  selected  and  called  out  of  the  world,  by  the  doctrine 
of  the  gospel,  to  worship  the  true  God  according  to  his  word. 
The  church  must  include  all  the  elect  of  God,  of  what 
nation  soever,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  world, 
who  make  but  one  body,  whereof  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Head. 
—  Col.  1:  18.  'The  church'  in  any  certain  place  must 
include  all  the  faithful  who  are  wont  to  assemble  in  such 
place  for  solemn  worship.  —  Horn.  16  :  5.  We  thus  have  in 
the  Scriptures  not  only  'churches  of  God/  'churches  of 
Christ/  and  'churches  of  the  saints/  but  we  have  'the 
church  at  Jerusalem/  Acts  8:1;'  the  church  which  is  at 
Nymphas'  house/  Col.  4  :  15:  'the  church  at  Babylon/  1 
Pet.  5:  13;  'the  church  in  the  wilderness/  Acts  7:  38; 
'  the  church  at  Antioch/  Acts  13  :  1 ;  'the  church  of  Lao- 
dicea/  Col.  4:  16;  'the  church  of  Ephesus/  Bev.  2:1; 
'  the  church  that  is  in  their  house/  Rom.  16  :  5  ;  'churches 


OBJECTIONS    CONSIDERED.  317 

of  Galatia/  'of  Asia,'  1  Cor.  16  :  1,  19;  'churches  of  Ju- 
dea/  Gal.  1 :  22 ;  •*  churches  of  Gentiles/  Rom  16  :  4  ;   &c. 

kc.  The  above  are  sufficient,  to  my  mind,  to  establish  the 
position  that  a  church  should  be  simply  called  a  '  church/  so 
described  that  its  characteristics  may  be  understood.  You, 
therefore,  in  Boston,  have  considered  yourselves  as  '  the 
church  at  the  Tabernacle.' 

"Is  it  asked,  Do  you  repudiate  the  name  of  '  Advent- 
ists  ?'  I  reply,  I  do,  when  it  is  applied  to  the  church,  but  not 
when  it  is  applied  to  those  who  compose  the  church.  Words 
are  the  symbols  of  ideas.  All  bodies  of  men  have  their  pecu- 
liarities and  characteristics.  It  is,  therefore,  necessary  to  dis- 
tinguish them  as  such.  Thus  God  has  divided  mankind  into 
peoples,  kindred,  tribes,  nations  and  tongues.  Those  of  the 
same  peculiarities  have  an  affinity  for  each  other,  and  nat- 
urally associate  together.  All  these  branches  of  the  race 
are  known  by  their  distinctive  names,  and  all  acknowledge 
the  convenience  of  their  being  thus  known ;  it  enables  us  to 
designate  those  we  wish  by  an  intelligible  term.  Thus  the 
Israelites  of  old  were  known  as  belonging  to  the  tribes 
of  Judah,  of  Joseph,  of  Dan,  &c,  as  the  case  might  be.  To 
call  men  sons  of  Jacob  was  sufficient  to  show  that  they  be- 
longed to  the  nation ;  but  even  then  it  was  found  necessary 
to  know  their  tribe,  their  family,  and  their  household ;  and 
even  the  different  members  of  the  same  household  must  have 
different  names  to  distinguish  one  from  the  other. 

"  While  all  Christians  in  the  days  of  the  apostles  were 
known  as  Christians,  yet  if  they  had  had  no  other  distinct- 
ive appellations,  there  would  have  been  as  much  confusion 
as  there  would  be  in  a  city,  if  all  its  inhabitants  were  known 
by  the  name  of  John  and  Mary ;  or  as  there  would  be  in  a 
family,  if  there  should  be  twelve  children  with  no  individual 
names, —  call  one,  and  all  would  run ;  or  as  it  is  at  the  pres- 
ent time,  none  would  regard  the  call.  They  would  not  know 
which  was  meant.  Therefore,  we  find  the  apostles  writing, 
now  to  the  Hebrews,  then  to  the  Romans,  and  again  to  the 
Ephesians,  and  Galatians,  &c.  &c.  If,  therefore,  it  was 
right  for  Paul  to  speak  of  the  'churches  of  the  Gentiles/ 
Rom.  16  :  4,  it  may  not  be  so  very  wrong  for  us  to  speak  of 
the  churches  of  the  Adventists,  or  the  churches  of  the  Con- 
gregationalists,  &c. ;  while,  at  the  same  time,  it  would  be  un- 


318  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

scriptural  to  call  an    association  of  churches    the    Advent 
church,  the  Methodist  church,  <fcc.  &c. 

"  It  is  again  said  that  we  have  no  right  to  be  called  Advent- 
ists,  because  there  are  others  who  believe  in  the  pre-millen- 
nial  advent ;  and  that  to  apply  it  to  ourselves  is  arrogancy. 
To  this  I  reply,  that  it  cannot  be  arrogancy  if  no  others 
claim  it  but  ourselves.  We  do  not  claim  it  belongs  to  us  exclu- 
sively. All  have  a  right  to  it  who  wish  thus  to  be  designs 
But  those  who  repudiate  the  name  have  surely  no  right  to 
find  fault  with  our  use  of  it :  such  can  have  no  claim  to  it. 
Neither  do  we,  when  we  call  ourselves  Adventists.  say  that 
we  are  the  only  Adventists.  any  more  than  vre  say.  when  we 
call  ourselves  Americans,  that  we  are  the  only  Americans. 
It  should,  however,  be  understood,  that  words  are  entirely 
arbitrary,  and  that  custom  alone  establishes  their  use.  Was 
the  term  Adventist  in  use  ten  years  ago  ]  Ho ;  it  is  not 
in  the  dictionary ;  it  is  a  newly-coined  word,  made  by  ap- 
pending an  affix  to  the  word  Advent.  In  the  use  of  the 
word  it  has  been  only  applied  to  those  of  like  precious  faith 
with  ourselves :  and  by  its  use  the  community  understand 
who.  and  who  alone,  are  intended.  The  coiners  of  the  word 
are  entitled  to  it,  and  those  who  associate  with  them.  But 
let  it  be  distinctly  understood,  that,  at  the  Albany  Conference, 
the  question  did  not  arise  whether  we  should  adopt  that  name. 
It  was  already  upon  us  :  and  the  only  question  that  arose 
respecting  it,  was  whether,  when  speaking  of  some  fanatics 
who  call  themselves  Adventists.  the  word  should  be  permit- 
ted to  remain  in  that  connection.  But.  says  one.  why  is  that 
Conference  called  a  •'  Conference  of  Adventists'  I  It  is  not 
so  called  by  vote  or  direction  of  the  Conference :  but  as  an 
Adventist  is,  in  accordance  with  the  use  of  the  term,  one 
who  believes  in  the  immediate  coming  of  Christ,  and  as  all 
those  who  thus  assembled  professed  thus  to  believe,  it  was  in 
truth  a  conference  of  Adventists.     What  "s  in  a  name  1 

6  The  rose  would  smell  the  sa??ie, 
If  called  by  any  name.' 

11  2.  Another  objection  to  that  body  is.  that  they  told  the 
world  some  things  which  they  believed  the  Scriptures  teach, 
and  some  things  which  they  believed  they  do  not  teach.  Let 
us  look  at  this  objection.     Has  not  a  man  a  right  to  tell  the 


OBJECTIONS   CONSIDERED.  319 

world  what  he  does  or  does  not  believe  ?  0,  yes,  certainly. 
Then  have  not  five,  or  ten,  or  fifty  men  the  same  privilege  ? 
Most  certainly.  Then,  wherein,  pray,  is  the  objection?  0, 
says  one,  it  looks  too  much  like  a  creed ;  and  I  object  to  all 
creeds,  either  oral  or  written.  But  what  do  you  mean  by 
a  creed  ?  If  you  mean  by  it  a  test  of  Christian  character,  I 
agree  with  you ;  and  the  Conference  expressly  voted  that 
they  had  '  no  fellowship  with  any  of  the  new  tests,  as  con- 
ditions of  salvation,  in  addition  to  repentance  towards  God, 
and  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  a  looking  for  and 
loving  his  appearing.'  But  if  you  mean  that  a  man  or  body 
of  men  have  no  right  to  speak  or  write  what  they  believe,  I 
must  dissent  from  you.  The  objector  replies,  We  wTant  noth- 
ing short  of  the  entire  Scriptures  for  our  creed  ;  that  alone 
is  sufficient.  And  that  alone  is  sufficient  for  me.  But 
while  I  receive  the  entire  word  of  God  according  to  my  un- 
derstanding of  its  teachings,  and  while  different  men  draw 
different  and  opposite  conclusions  respecting  its  teachings, 
have  I  no  right  to  inform  the  world  what  I  conceive  to  be 
the  truth  it  inculcates  ? 

"  To  say  that  I  believe  the  Bible,  and  that  alone,  is  to  say 
the  same  that  all  denominations  say.  It  is,  therefore,  mean- 
ingless as  far  as  any  distinctive  idea  is  conveyed ;  it  is  truth 
in  general,  meaning  nothing  in  particular.  And  with  that 
view,  why  should  we  stand  aloof  from  all  others  who  claim 
to  believe  the  same?  Theodore  Parker,  the  rationalist, 
claims  to  stand  on  that  ground ;  and  yet  his  constructions  of 
Scripture  are  so  <m£i-scriptural,  that  even  the  Unitarians 
repudiate  him.  Can  there  then  be  no  line  of  demarcation 
between  what  we  believe  to  be  the  truths  and  errors  which 
are  alike  claimed  to  be  based  upon  the  word  of  God? 
Have  we  no  right  to  tell  the  world  which  of  opposite  doc- 
trines we  believe  are  therein  contained  ?  If  not,  we  have 
surely  no  right  to  disfellowship  Theodore  Parker  and  his  ad- 
herents ;  and  nothing  can  be  rejected,  and  nothing  received. 
And  if  so,  those  who  told  us  to  come  out  of  Babylon,  be- 
cause the  churches  rejected  their  creed,  which  was  their 
understanding  of  the  Scriptures,  did  wrong. 

"  I  wish  here  to  say,  that,  in  proclaiming  the  coming  of 
Christ  to  the  world,  nothing  was  further  from  my  thoughts 
than  to  form  a  separate,  distinct  body  of  Christians.  It  never 
28 


320  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

came  into  my  heart ;  I  thought  to  benefit  all.  But,  by  a 
combination  of  circumstances  within  and  without,  over  which 
we  had  no  control,  we  find  ourselves  as  we  are.  We  have 
been  called  out  of  the  churches,  and  thrust  out  of  the  church- 
es. The  churches  have  refused  to  fellowship  us  ;  and  what 
shall  we  do  ?  We  cannot  go  back,  and  give  up  our  blessed 
hope.  And  all  we  can  do  is  to  find  what  the  gospel  teaches, 
and  act  accordingly. 

"  The  fact  is,  there  is  no  man  living  without  his  distinct 
creed ;  for  a  creed  is  nothing  more  or  less  than  {credo)  a 
belief.  When  a  man  makes  his  belief,  or  a  body  of  men 
make  their  belief,  the  test  of  other  men's  salvation,  they  act 
as  bigots  ;  they  usurp  God's  prerogative.  But  when  he  or 
they  allow  to  others  the  same  liberty  of  thought  and  speech 
that  they  ask  for  themselves,  making  them  only  responsible 
to  their  Maker,  they  do  not  transgress  the  c  golden  rule.' 

"  What  a  man  believes  is  his  creed.  The  creed  of  the  in- 
fidel is,  '  I  believe  in  all  unbelief.'  The  creed  of  another 
is,  i  I  believe  we  have  no  right  to  write  out  our  belief.'  An- 
other's creed  is,  '  I  do  not  believe  in  any  creed,  except  the 
New  Testament.'  And  the  creed  of  another  is,  '  I  believe 
we  have  the  right  to  write  out  and  undeceive  the  world 
as  to  our  understanding  of  scriptural  teachings.'  Now 
shall  the  man  whose  creed  is,  '  I  believe  we  have  no  right 
to  have  an  oral  or  written  creed'  (belief),  make  that  creed 
the  standard  to  which  all  men  must  submit?  If  he  does,  he 
is  himself  a  bigot.  A  man  who  thus  believes,  has  no  right 
to  speak  or  write  ;  for,  if  he  speaks  what  he  believes,  he  has 
an  i  oral  creed,'  and  if  he  writes  what  he  believes,  he  has 
a  '  ivritten  creed.'  If,  therefore,  he  speaks  or  writes,  he 
puts  forth  his  creed,  unless  he  speaks  or  writes  what  he  does 
not  believe  ;  and  then  he  is  a  hypocrite.  A  man  who  thus 
believes,  can  write  for  no  periodical ;  he  can  preach  no  ser- 
mon ;  every  thought  he  gives  utterance  to  is  a  violation  of 
his  creed  ;  it  is  a  departure  from  it,  or  in  confliction  with  it. 
And  while  thus  continually  violating  his  own  creed,  he  has 
surely  no  right  to  oblige  all  others  to  submit  to  it. 

"  Those  who  cry  the  loudest  against  creeds,  and  disclaim 
the  strongest,  are  the  very  men  who  require  others  to  submit 
to  their  ipse  dixit.  They  require  the  largest  liberty  for  them- 
selves, and  allow  the  least  to  others.     And  if  others  are  not 


OBJECTIONS   CONSIDERED.  321 

ready  to  comply  with  their  fancies,  ever  varying  as  they  are, 
they  are  ready  to  consign  them  to  perdition.  For  shame  on 
such  absurd  inconsistencies  ! 

"  The  aim  of  all  our  writings  has  been  to  show  the  church 
and  the  world  what  we  believe  to  be  the  great  truths  the 
Bible  inculcates.  We  have  had  a  right  so  to  do.  These 
truths  have  had  a  mighty  influence  on  the  community.  To 
bring  discredit  on  them,  and  thus  to  weaken  our  labors,  the 
adversary  has  connected  with  them,  in  the  mind  of  the  public, 
various  odious  extravagances.  When  we,  therefore,  set  our- 
selves up  as  teachers,  all  have  a  right  to  demand  of  us  what 
we  believe,  and  wThat  wTe  teach.  Says  the  apostle,  '  So  we 
preached,  and  so  ye  believed.'  We  must,  therefore,  be  ever 
ready  to  tell  how  we  believe,  what  we  believe,  and  why  we 
believe.  If,  therefore,  we  have  no  fellowship  with  any  of  the 
abominations  so  rife  among  us,  we  have  the  right  to  tell  it  to 
the  world.  And  if  a  large  company  of  'like  precious  faith* 
have  the  same  views  on  these  points,  they  have  an  equal 
right  to  unite  in  thus  proclaiming  it  to  the  world.  Those 
who  have  sympathy  with  those  things,  or  who  will  unite  with 
none  who  avow  to  the  world  their  belief,  have  the  same  priv- 
ilege to  dissent  from  them.  And  if  any  prefer  to  stand 
alone,  rather  than  to  unite  with  a  body  who  do  not  act  in 
every  respect  in  accordance  with  their  individual  creed,  who 
seek  to  get  up  a  party  that  do,  let  it  be  so  understood,  that 
all  may  act  accordingly  and  understandingly. 

"  But  what  has  the  Albany  Conference  done  ?  Why,  it 
has  committed  the  crime  of  informing  the  world  of  some  of 
the  important  truths  which  the  members  of  it  believe  the 
Bible  inculcates,  w7ith  the  reasons  therefor ;  and  some  things 
which  they  believe  are  not  therein  contained  !  No  Advent 
lecturers  or  writers  can  consistently  object  to  that ;  for  in  so 
doing  they  would  condemn  themselves.  i  Thou,  therefore, 
wThich  teachest  another,  teachest  thou  not  thyself?'  '  Thou 
that  abhorrest  idols,  dost  thou  commit  sacrilege  ?  \ 

"  3.  Another  objects  to  the  doings  of  that  Conference  be- 
cause they  recommended  organization.  Indeed  !  And  what 
did  they  recommend  1  Why,  they  recommended  to  all  '  a 
careful  examination  of  the  Scriptures,  and  the  adoption  of 
such  principles  of  association  and  order  as  are  in  accordance 
therewith,  that  they  may  enjoy  the  advantages  of  that  church 


822  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

relation  which  Christ  has  instituted.'  It  is  left  to  each 
church  to  judge  of  their  own  association  for  themselves. 
Those  who  would  object  to  this  would  surely  object  to  the  rec- 
ommendation of  the  Scriptures  as  a  rule  of  faith  and  practice. 
Those  who  would  object  to  this  would  have  objected  had 
they  recommended  all  to  fear  God  and  give  glory  to  Him. 

Li  4.  Another  objection  is,  that  they  passed  resolutions 
expressive  of  their  sense  of  truth  and  duty.  This  is  a  great 
sin,  truly.  It  is  said,  a  resolution  can  prove  nothing  ;  and 
that  it  would  be  absurd  to  resolve  that  light  is  light,  or  that 
God  reigns.  That  may  all  be  ;  and  yet  it  may  be  perfectly 
proper  to  resolve  that  we  will  walk  in  the  light,  or  that  we 
will  submit  to  the  rule  of  God.  Every  soul  does  this  at  con- 
version ;  and  what  may  be  done  individually  may  certainly 
be  done  collectively.  To  bring  forward,  as  an  absurdity,  the 
use  of  a  thing  to  which  it  is  never  applied,  as  an  argument 
against  its  being  applied  to  other  uses,  is  to  set  up  a  man  of 
straw  which  cannot  stand  alone,  and,  in  knocking  it  down, 
take  to  one's  self  the  credit  of  having  overturned  an  immu- 
table principle,  of  which  it  was  only  an  effigy.  Resolutions 
serve  the  two-fold  purpose  of  showing  our  true  position  to 
the  public,  and  of  nerving  up  our  hearts  in  defence  of  such 
position. 

"  5.  Another  objection  is,  that  they  have  expressed  them- 
selves with  regard  to  the  intermediate  state  of  the  dead,  re- 
specting which  there  is  a  difference  of  opinion  among  Advent- 
ists.  To  this  I  reply,  that  that  question  did  not  arise  at  the 
Conference.  No  allusion  was  made  to  it  either  in  their  do- 
ings or  speeches.  They  expressed,  what  all  Adventists  believe, 
that  the  time  of  the  entrance  of  departed  saints  into  their  in- 
heritance is  at  the  resurrection.  But  the  question,  whether 
the  intermediate  state  of  the  dead  is  a  conscious  or  an  uncon- 
scious one,  was  not  even  mooted  there.  This  shows  the 
necessity  of  great  cautiousness  in  stating  objections  against 
what  is  not  perfectly  understood. 

"  6.  Another  objection  is,  that  the  proceedings  '  look  like 
doing  something  in  the  future  ; '  '  seem  like  aiming  at  some- 
thing which  we  shall  not  approve.'  Well,  as  those  are  not 
objections  to  what  was  there  done,  and  are  only  fears  of  what 
may  be  done,  arising  out  of  the  jealousy  of  the  human  heart, 
I  shall  not  spend  any  time  in  replying  to  them ;  for  all  mag- 


OBJECTIONS    CONSIDERED.  323 

nanimous  minds  are  content  with  pointing  to  actual  trans- 
gressions, and  never  allude  to  future  fancied  ones,  unless 
they  are  very  desirous  of  finding  something  to  find  fault  with, 
in  accordance  with  their  pre-judgment. 

1 :  The  above  are  all  the  objections  I  recollect  to  have  heard 
or  seen  advanced  against  the  doings  of  the  Albany  Confer- 
ence ;  and  those  have  been  by  a  very  few.  I  am  happy  to 
see  that  the  doings  there  give  such  general  satisfaction.  What 
weight  such  objections  are  entitled  to,  all  must  judge  of  for 
themselves.  It  must  be  evident,  that  unless  we  come  out  of 
the  BABYLON  into  which  we  have  been  thrust,  God  will 
not  bless  us. 

"  The  question  then  comes  home  to  each  one  of  our  hearts, 
Shall  we  continue  in  the  anarchy  in  which  we  have  been,  or 
shall  we  take  gospel  measures  to  restore  gospel  order,  that, 
at  the  Master's  coming,  we  may  be  approved  of  Him  ?  It 
must  be  evident  to  all,  that  without  union  we  can  do  noth- 
ing ;  and  if  there  are  no  '  important  truths '  in  which  we 
are  united,  all  can  see  that  there  can  be  no  union  among  us. 
1  How  can  two  walk  together  except  they  be  agreed  ?  '  We 
can  only  unite  on  those  points  in  which  there  is  union.  The 
great  doctrine  which  has  called  us  out  is  the  nearness  of 
Christ's  Advent.  To  persuade  men  to  repent,  in  view  of  the 
coming  King,  we  should  all  be  willing  to  lay  aside  the  unes- 
sential of  our  belief,  which  are  at  variance  with  such  union. 

"  All  union  consists  in  a  sacrifice  of  individual  prepos- 
sessions for  the  common  good.  Those  who  love  the  peace  of 
Zion  more  than  they  do  their  private  opinions  will  be  prompt 
thus  to  unite.  Those  who  love  self  more  than  they  do  the 
general  good  will  contend  for  their  own  selfish  ends.  Any 
doctrine,  however  plausible  to  the  human  mind,  which  tends 
to  divide  true  Christians,  cannot  be  of  God.  We  cannot  be 
the  disciples  of  Christ,  unless  we  love  one  another,  and  faith- 
fully labor  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of 
peace.  And.  therefore,  those  who  seek  to  produce  disorder 
and  confusion,  contrary  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  cannot  be 
true  friends  of  the  cause. 

"  The  union  that  prevailed  at  the  Albany  Conference  was 

what  should  ever  characterize  the  children  of  God.     They 

laid  aside  their  prejudices,  and  acted  for  the  general  good; 

and  the  Adventists,  as  a  body,  approve  of  their  doings. 

28* 


? 


324  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER, 

What,  then,  shall  we  think  of  the  efforts  of  any  who  seek  to 
undermine  the  counsels  which  there  prevailed  ?  Shall  we 
not  look  upon  them  as  endeavoring  to  divide  the  children  of 
God  ?  Shall  individuals  set  up  their  own  individual  creed 
as  the  criterion  to  which  a  united  and  harmonious  body  shall 
come? 

"  Let  all  ponder  these  things  well.  We  live  in  an  awfully 
dangerous  moment  of  time,  when  we  are  beset  with  foes 
without  and  foes  within.  Let  us,  therefore,  take  heed  to 
our  wTays,  to  all  our  thoughts,  and  to  all  our  doings.  Let 
us  have  no  enemies  in  disguise  among  us,  professing  to  be 
friends.  Let  all  who  have  no  fellowship  with  the  principles 
we  inculcate,  manifest  it.  But  let  all  who  are  willing  to 
contend  earnestly  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints 
not  be  afraid  to  tell  the  world  what  they  believe  the  Scrip- 
tures teach,  and  fight  manfully  the  good  fight,  for  they  will 
soon  win  the  race.     Yours  in  the  blessed  hope, 

"  William  Miller. 

«  Boston,  May  27,  1845." 

The  doings  of  that  Conference  were  unanimously  ratified 
by  the  annual  Conferences  subsequently  held,  in  that  year,  in 
New  York,  and  in  Boston;  and  the  "important  truths" 
there  inculcated  were  often  unanimously  reaffirmed,  so  that 
they  have  become  the  settled  principles  of  those  known  as 
Adventists.  Others,  dissenting  from  them,  but  agreeing  in 
unimportant  particulars,  and  yet  claiming  to  be  Adventists, 
are  not  recognized  as  such  by  Adventists. 

By  the  date  of  the  foregoing  article  it  will  be  seen  that 
Mr.  Miller  was  in  Boston,  where  he  arrived  on  Saturday, 
May  24th,  to  attend  the  annual  Conference  there  of  the  week 
following.  That  commenced  on  Monday,  May  26th,  when 
Mr.  M.  discoursed  from  Rev.  6  :  17, —  "  For  the  great  day 
of  his  wrath  is  come ;  and  who  shall  be  able  to  stand  ?"  He 
made  a  personal  and  practical  application  of  this  event,  and 
presented  the  evidence  of  its  probable  nearness. 

During  the  Conference,  he  spoke  feelingly  of  the  passing 
of  the  time.  He  remarked  that,  "  Ere  this,  he  had  been  in 
hopes  of  meeting  all  present  in  the  heavenly  kingdom.  But, 
if  we  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  however  much  we  may  be 
disappointed,  we  shall  not  forget  Christ's  coming.    God  may 


CONFERENCE   IN   BOSTON.  325 

see  fit  to  disappoint  us,  sometimes,  for  our  good.  We  may 
not  see  the  wisdom  and  fulness  of  the  whole  of  God's  plan ; 
but  he  never  tries  us  but  for  our  profit.  Therefore,  we 
should  not  be  disheartened  or  cast  down.  Every  disappoint- 
ment only  made  him  more  strong  in  the  belief  of  the  cer- 
tainty of  the  nearness  of  Christ's  appearing. 

"  I  had/'7  he  said,  "  denied  the  Bible  for  twelve  years.  I 
used  to  read  it  to  see  how  curiously  men  would  act,  and  con- 
tradict each  other.  But,  suddenly,  I  became  more  solemn ; 
its  truth  began  to  dawn  upon  my  mind ;  and  I  was  in  great 
darkness  for  six  months.  I  saw  that  I  was  a  poor  sinner ; 
but  I  was  soon  enabled  to  love  Jesus  Christ,  and  have  con- 
tinued to  love  him  even  till  the  present  time.  I  saw  that, 
if  the  Bible  was  true,  Christ  was  the  only  Saviour  of  men. 
I  then  began  to  study  more  fully  the  Scriptures, —  deter- 
mined to  study,  text  by  text,  till  I  was  fully  satisfied  as  to 
their  import.  In  comparing  Scripture  with  Scripture,  such 
a  light  broke  in  upon  my  mind  as  I  had  never  before  seen. 
I  was  about  two  years  in  going  through  with  the  Bible,  in 
this  manner;  and  I  found  it  a  perfect  piece  of  order  and 
beauty.  And,  though  I  have  been  greatly  disappointed,  yet 
I  have  never  ceased  to  love  and  regard  the  authority  of  the 
Scriptures. 

"  Brethren,  we  must  keep  humble.  I  sometimes  tremble 
when  I  see  individuals  endeavoring  to  exalt  themselves,  and 
denounce  others  who  do  not  see  just  as  they  do.  Be  careful 
not  to  err  in  favor  of  self.  Be  careful  to  avoid  self-righteous- 
ness. I  have  noticed  that  those  who  have  left  the  Second 
Advent  cause  are  the  very  ones  for  whom  I  used  to  tremble, 
in  view  of  their  arrogancy  and  self-righteousness.  We  must 
not  look  to  ourselves,  but  must  look  alone  to  God.  We 
must  cling  to  our  Heavenly  Father's  arm,  that  we  may  hold 
fast  our  confidence  even  unto  the  end.  The  word  of  God 
teaches  us  that  we  are  to  be  guided  alone  by  Him.  Had  our 
brethren,  who  have  apostatized,  thus  looked  to  Him,  they 
would  never  have  fallen  into  the  awful  errors  into  which  they 
have  been  led.  I  love  those  brethren,  but  I  tremble  for  their 
errors.  0,  let  us  depend  wholly  on  God,  that  we  may  be 
preserved  also  from  departing  from  the  rectitude  of  our  faith ! 
And  may  we  all  be  enabled  to  live  out  the  prayer,  i  Not  my 
wall,  0  God,  but  thine  be  done.'  " 


LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 


It  was  at  this  Conference  that  he  narrated  the  story  of  the 
old  lady,  whose  anxiety  to  know  who  uwe  is"  was  so  hap- 
pily allayed  by  the  doings  at  Albany. 


CHAPTER    XXII. 

HIS   APOLOGY   AND    DEFENCE DEFINITEMESS   OF   PROPHETIC    TIME 

ERRONEOUS   VIEWS   CONNECTED   WITH   THE   DOCTRINE,   ETC. 

After  the  Boston  Conference,  Mr.  Miller  accompanied 
Mr.  Himes  to  Portland,  Me.,  where  he  gave  discourses  in 
the  afternoon  and  evening  of  Sunday,  June  1st,  to  crowded 
audiences.  Many  of  those  present,  doubtless,  were  drawn  to 
hear  him  by  motives  of  curiosity,  because  of  the  disappoint- 
ment in  time.  The  necessity  of  patience  and  of  watchful- 
ness were  subjects  on  which  he  discoursed. 

He  returned  to  Boston,  and  from  thence  went  to  a  camp- 
meeting  at  Champlain,  N.  Y.,  on  the  10th  of  June.  After 
this  he  returned  home,  in  the  enjoyment  of  good  general 
health,  but  somewhat  afflicted  by  boils. 

As  the  author  of  a  movement  which  had  resulted  in  dis- 
appointment, and,  in  some  respects,  disaster,  Mr.  Miller 
deemed  it  proper  that  he  should  make  a  personal  statement 
to  the  Christian  public,  show  the  motives  that  had  actuated 
him,  and  disavow  any  sympathy  with  the  extremes  into 
which  some  had  gone,  contrary  to  his  earnest  remonstrances. 
His  growing  infirmities  made  him  shrink  from  the  labor  of 
writing,  and  caused  him  to  desire  an  amanuensis.  For  this 
purpose  the  writer  of  this  visited  him,  in  the  month  of  July, 
1845,  and  Mr.  Miller  dictated  his  "  Apology  and  Defence," 
a  tract  of  thirty-six  pages,  which  was  published  by  Mr. 
Himes,  in  Boston. 

It  was  addressed  "  To  all  who  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
in  sincerity,"  and  commenced  with  : 

"  As  all  men  are  responsible  to  the  community  for  the 
sentiments  they  may  promulgate,  the  public  have  a  right  to 
expect  from  me  a  candid  statement  in  reference  to  my  dis- 


APOLOGY  AND  DEFENCE.  827 

appointment  in  not  realizing  the  advent  of  Christ  in  A.  D. 
1843-4,  which  I  had  confidently  believed.  I  have,  there- 
fore, considered  it  not  presumptuous  in  me  to  lay  before  the 
Christian  public  a  retrospective  view  of  the  whole  question, 
the  motives  that  actuated  me5  and  the  reasons  by  which  I 
was  guided." 

He  then  proceeded  to  narrate  his  early  history,  and  gave 
an  account  of  his  "  deistical  opinions,"  his  "  first  religious 
impressions,"  his  " connection  with  the  army,"  his  "removal 
to  Low  Hampton,"  his  "  determination  to  understand  the 
Scriptures,"  his  "  manner  of  studying  the  Bible,"  the 
"  results  arrived  at,"  and  his  subsequent  labors  ;  all  of  which 
have  been  noticed  at  greater  length  in  the  foregoing  pages. 
He  then  summed  up  his  labors  as  follows  : 

"From  the  commencement  of  that  publication,  I  was 
overwhelmed  with  invitations  to  labor  in  various  places, 
with  which  I  complied  as  far  as  my  health  and  time  would 
allow.  I  labored  extensively  in  all  the  New  England  and 
Middle  States,  in  Ohio,  Michigan,  Maryland,  the  District 
of  Columbia,  and  in  Canada  East  and  West,  giving  about 
four  thousand  lectures  in  something  like  five  hundred  differ- 
ent towns. 

M  I  should  think  that  about  two  hundred  ministers  em- 
braced my  views,  in  all  the  different  parts  of  the  United 
States  and  Canada ;  and  that  there  have  been  about  five 
hundred  public  lecturers.  In  all  the  sections  of  country 
where  I  labored, — not  only  in  the  towns  I  visited,  but  in  those 
in  their  vicinity, —  there  were  more  or  less  that  embraced  the 
doctrine  of  the  Advent.  In  some  places  only  a  very  few, 
and  in  other  places  there  have  been  a  large  number. 

"  In  nearly  a  thousand  places  Advent  congregations  have 
been  raised  up,  numbering,  as  near  as  I  can  estimate,  some 
fifty  thousand  believers.  On  recalling  to  mind  the  several 
places  of  my  labors,  I  can  reckon  up  about  six  thousand  in- 
stances of  conversion  from  nature's  darkness  to  God's  mar- 
vellous light,  the  result  of  my  personal  labors  alone ;  and  I 
should  judge  the  number  to  be  much  greater.  Of  this  num- 
ber I  can  recall  to  mind  about  seven  hundred,  who  were, 
previously  to  their  attending  my  lectures,  infidels ;  and 
their  number  may  have  been  twice  as  great.  Happy  re- 
sults have  also  followed  from  the  labors  of  my  brethren^ 


SiS  LIFE    OF   'WILLIAM   MILLER. 

many  of  whom  I  would  like  to  mention  here,  if  my  limits 
1  permit 

••In  all  my  labors  I  never  had  the  desire  or  thought  to 
establish  any  separate  interest  from  that  of  existing  denomi- 
nations, or  to  benefit  one  at  the  expense  of  another.  I 
thought  to  benefit  all.  Supposing  that  all  Christians  would 
rejoice  in  the  prospect  of  Christ's  coming,  and  that  those 
could  oof  see  as  I  did  would  not  love  any  the  less  tame 
who  should  embrace  this  doctrine.  I  did  not  conceive  there 
.1  ever  be  any  necessity  for  separate  meetings.  My 
whole  object  was  a  desire  to  convert  souls  to  God.  to  notify 
the  world  of  a  coming  judgment,  and  to  induce  my  feilow- 
men  to  make  that  preparation  of  heart  which  will  enable 
them  to  meet  their  God  in  peace.  The  great  majority  of 
those  who  were  converted  under  my  labors  united  with  the 
various  existing  churches.  When  individuals  came  to  me  to 
inquire  respecting  their  duty.  I  always  told  them  to  go  where 
they  would  feel  at  home  :  and  I  never  favored  any  one  de- 
nomination in  my  adwice  to  such. 

i;  But  my  brethren  began  to  complain  that  they  were  not 
fed  by  their  ministers,  and  wanted  expository  preaching.  I 
ihein  it  was  their  duty  to  interest  their  ministers  in  the 
prophecies :  but.  if  they  could  not  receive  the  teachings  un- 
der which  they  sat.  they  must  act  in  aeon  with  their 
own  sense  of  duty.  They  then  began  to  complain  that  they 
had  not  liberty  in  the  churches  to  present  their  views  freely, 
or  to  exhom  their  brethren  to  prepare  for  the  judgment. 
Those  in  the  neighborhood  of  Advent  preaching  felt  that, 
when  they  could  listen  to  these  glorious  truths,  it  was  their 
privilege  so  to  do.  For  this  many  of  them  were  treated 
no.  Some  came  out  of  their  churches,  and  some  were 
expelled.  Where  the  blame  lay  it  is  not  necessary  here  to 
inquire  :  there  was.  doubtless,  wrung  on  both  sides.  The 
result  was  that  a  tooling  of  opposition  arose,  or 
many  of  the  ministers  and  churches  that  dia  nv 
these  views,  against  those  who  were  looking  for  the  blessed 
hope  and  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ." 

He  then  spoke  of  various  points  as  follows  : 


DEFINITENESS   OF   PROPHETIC   TIME.  329 


£i  DEFINITENESS    OF    PROPHETIC    TIME. 

" 1  had  never  been  positive  as  to  any  particular  day  for 
the  Lord's  appearing,  believing  that  no  man  could  know  the 
day  and  hour.  In  all  my  published  lectures  will  be  seen, 
on  the  title-page,  {  about  the  year  1843.'  In  all  my  oral 
lectures  I  invariably  told  my  audiences  that  the  periods 
would  terminate  in  1843  if  there  were  no  mistakes  in  my 
calculation;  but  that  I  could  not  say  the  end  might  not  come 
even  before  that  time,  and  they  should  be  continually  pre- 
pared. In  1842,  some  of  my  brethren  preached,  with  great 
positiveness,  the  exact  year,  and  censured  me  for  putting  in 
an  if.  The  public  press  had  also  published  that  I  had  fixed 
upon  a  definite  day,  the  23d  of  April,  for  the  Lord's  advent. 
Therefore,  in  December  of  that  year,  as  I  could  see  no  error 
in  my  reckoning,  I  published  my  belief,  that,  some  time  be- 
tween March  21,  1843,  and  March  21,  1844,  the  Lord 
would  come.  Some  had  their  minds  fixed  on  particular 
days ;  but  I  could  see  no  evidence  for  such,  unless  the 
types  of  the  Mosaic  law  pointed  to  the  Feast  of  Taber- 
nacles. 

"  During  the  year  1843,  the  most  violent  denunciations 
were  heaped  upon  me,  and  those  associated  with  me,  by  the 
press  and  some  pulpits.  Our  motives  were  assailed,  our 
principles  misrepresented,  and  our  characters  traduced. 
Time  passed  on,  and  the  21st  of  March.  1844,  went  by 
without  our  witnessing  the  appearing  of  the  Lord.  Our 
disappointment  was  •  great,  and  many  walked  no  more  with 
us. 

"  Previously  to  this,  in  the  fall  of  1843,  some  of  my 
brethren  began  to  call  the  churches  Babylon,  and  to  urge 
that  it  was  the  duty  of  Adventists  to  come  out  of  them. 
"With  this  I  was  much  grieved,  as  not  only  the  effect  was 
very  bad,  but  I  regarded  it  as  a  perversion  of  the  word  of 
God,  a  wresting  of  Scripture.  But  the  practice  spread  ex- 
tensively :  and,  from  that  time,  the  churches,  as  might  have 
been  expected,  were  closed  against  us.  It  prejudiced  many 
against  us,  and  created  a  deep  feeling  of  hostility  between 
Adventists  and  those  who  did  not  embrace  the  doctrine  ;  so 
that  most  of  the  Adventists  were  separated  from  their  re- 
spective churches.     This  was  a  result  which  I  never  desired 


330  LIFE    OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

nor  expected ;  but  it  was  brought  about  by  unforeseen  cir- 
cumstances. ^Ye  could,  then,  only  act  in  accordance  with 
the  position  in  which  we  were  thus  placed. 

"On  the  passing  of  ray  published  time.  I  frankly  acknowl- 
edged my  disappointment  in  reference  to  the  exact  period  ; 
but  my  faith  was  unchanged  in  any  essential  feature.  I. 
therefore,  continued  my  labors,  principally  at  the  "West. 
during  the  summer  of  1844.  until  { the  seventh-month, 
movement.'  as  it  is  called.  I  had  no  participation  in  this. 
only  as  I  wrote  a  letter,  eighteen  months  previously,  pre- 
senting the  observances  under  the  Mosaic  law  which  pointed 
to  that  month  as  a  probable  time  when  the  Advent  might  be 
expected.  This  was  written  because  some  were  looking  to 
definite  days  in  the  Spring.  I  had.  however,  no  expecta- 
tion that  so  unwarranted  a  use  would  be  made  of  those  types 
that  any  should  regard  a  belief  in  such  mere  inferential  evi- 
dence a  test  of  salvation.  I.  therefore,  had  no  fellowship 
with  that  movement  until  about  two  or  three  weeks  previous 
to  the  22d  of  October,  when,  seeing  it  had  obtained  such 
prevalence,  and  considering  it  was  at  a  probable  point  of 
time,  I  was  persuaded  that  it  was  a  work  of  God,  and  felt 
that,  if  it  should  pass  by,  I  should  be  more  disappointed 
than  I  was  in  my  first  published  time. 

"  But  that  time  passed,  and  I  was  again  disappointed. 
The  movement  was  of  such  a  character  that,  for  a  time,  it 
was  very  mysterious  to  me  :  and  the  results  following  it 
were  so  unaccountable  that  I  supposed  our  work  might  be 
completed,  and  that  a  few  weeks  only  might  elapse  between 
that  time  and  the  appearing  of  Christ.  However  that  might 
be,  I  regarded  my  own  work  as  completed,  and  that  what 
was  to  be  done  for  the  extension  of  these  views  must  be 
done  by  younger  brethren,  except  an  occasional  discourse 
from  myself/'' 

In  conclusion,  he  considered  the 

"  ERRONEOUS  VIEWS    CONNECTED  WITH   THE   DOCTRINE. 

"  As  time  has  progressed,  I  have  been  pained  to  see  many 
errors  which  have  been  embraced,  in  different  sections  of  the 
country,  by  some  who  have  labored  in  connection  with  myself; 
errors  which  I  cannot  countenance,  and  of  which  I  wish  to 


ERRONEOUS   VIEWS.  331 

speak  freely,  although  I  may  lose  the  fellowship  of  some  for 
faithfully  doing  my  duty. 

"  I  have  been  pained  to  see  a  spirit  of  sectarianism  and 
bigotry,  in  some  sections,  which  disfellowships  everything 
that  does  not  square  with  the  narrow  prejudices  of  individual 
minds.  There  is  a  tendency  to  exalt  individual  opinions  as 
a  standard  for  all  to  submit  to ;  a  disposition  to  place  the 
results  of  individual  investigation  upon  a  level  with  solemn 
conclusions  to  which  the  great  body  of  brethren  have  arrived. 
This  is  very  wrong ;  for,  while  we  are  in  this  world,  we  are 
so  short-sighted  that  we  should  never  regard  our  conclusions 
as  infallible,  should  bear  with  the  imperfections  of  others, 
and  receive  those  that  are  weak  in  the  faith,  but  not  to 
doubtful  disputations. 

u  Some  have  an  inclination  to  indulge  in  harsh  and  denun- 
ciatory remarks  against  all  who  do  not  agree  with  them. 
We  are  all  liable  to  err ;  but  we  should  avoid  thus  giving 
occasion  of  offence.  We  should  instruct  with  meekness  those 
that  oppose  themselves,  and  avoid  foolish  and  unlearned 
questions,  that  gender  strifes. 

"  There  may  be  causes  operating  on  the  minds  of  others, 
of  which  we  know  nothing,  that  influence  them  contrary  to 
the  truth,  as  we  have  received  it.  We  should,  therefore,  in 
all  our  intercourse  with  those  we  deem  in  error,  treat  them 
with  kindness  and  affection,  and  show  them  that  we  would 
do  them  good,  and  not  evil,  if  God,  peradventure,  will  give 
them  repentance  to  the  acknowledging  of  the  truth,  and  that 
they  may  recover  themselves  out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil, 
who  are  taken  captive  by  him  at  his  will. 

"  Some  are  prone  to  indulge  in  a  spirit  of  uneasiness  and 
disorder,  and  looseness  with  regard  to  church  government 
and  doctrine.  In  all  the  essential  doctrines  of  the  Bible,  as 
they  have  been  held  by  the  pious  of  the  church  in  all  ages, 
were  given  to  the  saints,  and  for  which  we  are  commanded 
earnestly  to  contend,  I  have  never  seen  any  reason  to  change 
my  faith.  Jesus  I  regard  as  my  all-sufficient  Saviour,  by 
whose  merits  alone  I  can  be  saved.  No  being  but  Him, 
'  whose  goings  forth  were  of  old  from  everlasting,'  who 
should  take  upon  himself  our  nature,  and  bear  our  sins  in 
his  own  body,  could  make  an  atonement,  on  the  efficacy  of 
which  I  should  dare  to  rely.  The  Bible  speaks  as  plainly 
29 


832  LIFE    OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

of  my  Saviour's  divinity  as  it  does  of  his  humanity.  He  is, 
therefore,  Emanuel,  God  with  us.  The  Bible  tells  us  plainly 
what  the  Saviour  is.  That  should  satisfy  us.  without  ven- 
turing beyond  the  Bible  to  say  what  he  is  not, 

"  It  is  in  the  use  of  terms  not  found  in  the  Scriptures 
that  disputations  arise.  For  instance,  the  difference  between 
the  Calvinist  and  Arniinian  I  often  thus  explain  :  Both  are 
in  the  same  dilemma.  They  are  like  a  company  of  men  in 
the  lower  story  of  a  house  when  the  tide  is  entering,  and 
from  which  there  is  no  escape  only  by  a  rope  by  which  they 
may  be  drawn  up.  All  endeavor  to  lay  hold  of  the  rope. 
The  one  is  continually  afraid  he  has  not  hold  of  the  right 
rope  ;  if  he  was  sure  he  had  the  right  rope  he  would  have 
no  fears.  The  other  has  no  fear  but  he  has  hold  of  the  right 
rope  ;  he  is  continually  afraid  his  rope  will  break.  Now  both 
are  equally  fearful  they  may  perchance  not  escape.  Their 
fears  arise  from  different  causes.  How  foolish  it  is,  then, 
for  them  to  begin  to  quarrel  with  each  other,  because  the  one 
supposes  the  rope  may  break,  and  the  other  that  it  is  the 
wrong  rope  ! 

"  Now  I  have  found  Christians  among  those  who  believed 
that  they  were  born  again,  but  might  fall  away  :  and  among 
those  that  believed  that,  if  they  were  ever  born  again,  they 
should  certainly  persevere.  The  difference  between  them  I 
regard  as  a  mere  matter  of  education  :  both  have  their  fears, 
and  both  believe  that  those  only  who  persevere  unto  the  end 
will  be  saved.  I,  therefore,  look  on  men  as  bigots  who 
quarrel  with  others  and  deny  that  those  are  Christians  who 
cannot  see  just  as  they  do. 

"  Some  are  disposed  to  lay  a  stress  on  the  seventh-month 
movement  which  is  not  warranted  by  the  Word.  There  was 
then  a  dedication  of  heart,  in  view  of  the  Lord's  coming, 
that  was  well  pleasing  in  the  sight  of  God.  Desire  for  the 
Lord's  coming  and  a  preparation  for  that  event  are  acceptable 
to  Him.  But,  because  we  then  ardently  desired  his  coming 
and  sought  that  preparation  that  was  necessary,  it  does  not 
follow  that  our  expectations  were  then  realized.  For  we 
were  certainly  disappointed.  "We  expected  the  personal 
coming  of  Christ  at  that  time  ;  and  now  to  contend  that  we 
were  not  mistaken  is  dishonest.  We  should  never  be  ashamed 
frankly  to  confess  all  our  errors. 


ERRONEOUS   VIEWS.  833 

"I  have  no  confidence  in  any  of  the  new  theories  that 
grew  out  of  that  movement,  namely,  that  Christ  then  came  as 
the  Bridegroom,  that  the  door  of  mercy  was  closed,  that 
there  is  no  salvation  for  sinners,  that  the  seventh  trumpet 
then  sounded,  or  that  it  was  a  fulfilment  of  prophecy  in  any 
sense.  The  spirit  of  fanaticism  which  resulted  from  it,  in 
some  places  leading  to  extravagance  and  excess,  I  regard  as 
of  the  same  nature  as  that  which  retarded  the  Reformation 
in  Germany,  and  the  same  as  have  been  connected  with 
every  religious  movement  since  the  first  advent.  The  truth 
is  not  responsible  for  such  devices  of  Satan  to  destroy  it.  I 
have  never  taught  a  neglect  of  any  of  the  duties  of  life, 
which  make  us  good  parents,  children,  neighbors,  or  citizens. 
I  have  ever  inculcated  a  faithful  performance  of  all  those 
duties,  enjoining  good  works  with  faith  and  repentance. 
Those  who  have  taught  the  neglect  of  these,  instead  of  act- 
ing  with  me,  or  being  my  followers,  as  they  are  called,  have 
departed  from  my  counsels,  and  acted  in  opposition  to  my 
uniform  teachings ;  men  have  crept  in  unawares,  who  have 
given  heed  to  seducing  spirits  and  doctrines  of  devils,  teach- 
ing lies  in  hypocrisy,  denying  any  personal  existence  of 
Christ,  forbidding  to  marry,  and  commanding  to  abstain  from 
certain  kinds  of  food,  denying  the  right  to  pray  for  sinners, 
and  commanding  to  violate  our  social  duties,  &c.  With  such 
things  I  have  no  sympathy. 

i;  The  doctrine  of  annihilation  and  the  soul's  unconscious- 
ness in  death  has  been  connected  in  the  minds  of  some  with 
the  doctrine  of  the  Advent.  With  this  there  is  no  necessary 
connection.  This  its  advocates  acknowledge.  The  doctrine 
of  the  Advent  was  the  faith  of  the  primitive  church ;  while 
the  doctrine  of  annihilation  was  no  part  of  their  faith.  It 
evidently  arises  from  a  mistaken  use  of  Bible  terms,  and  a 
stress  on  words  not  warranted  by  parallel  Scriptures.  The 
fact  that  no  trace  of  this  doctrine  is  found  among  the  ancient 
Jews,  except  the  Sadducees,  who  were  reproved  for  not 
believing  in  angels,  spirits,  and  the  resurrection,  shows  that 
none  of  the  pious  of  that  nation  attached  a  meaning  to  the 
words  of  the  Old  Testament  that  would  sustain  such  a  doc- 
trine. And  the  fact  that  no  trace  of  such  a  belief  is  found 
among  the  early  Christians,  shows  that  those  who  sat  under 
the  teachings  of  the  apostles  and  martyrs  gathered  no  such 


334  LIFE    01   WILLIAM    MILLEB 

doctrine  from  their  instructions.  Therefore,  when  such  a 
doctrine  is  taught,  a  meaning  must  be  attached  to  words  that 
they  would  not  bear  at  the  time  the  Scriptures  were  written. 
To  get  the  correct  understanding  of  Scripture,  we  must  use 
words  as  they  were  used  at  that  time. 

"  The  translators  of  the  Bible  had  no  faith  in  such  a  doc- 
trine :  therefore  they  attached  no  such  meaning  to  the  lan- 
guage they  used  in  rendering  the  original  as  is  attached  to 
the  words  of  the  texts  by  those  who  quote  them  to  maintain 
that  doctrine.  All  the  arguments  in  its  favor  rest  on  a  cer- 
tain meaning  attached  to  such  words  as  perish,  destroy, 
death,  ccc.  But  when  we  find  that  the  old  world,  being  only 
overflowed  with  water,  perished  :  and  that  when  our  Saviour 
told  the  Jews  to  destroy  the  temple  of  his  body,  and  in  three 
days  he  would  raise  it  up  (John  2  :  19),  he  did  not  mean  that 
his  body  should  cease  to  be  a  body  during  those  three  days  ; 
we  see  that  such  words  do  not  necessarily  convey  a  meaning 
that  proves  that  doctrine.  In  fact,  one  evangelist  uses  the 
word  destroy. —  *  Wilt  thou  destroy  us  before  the  time  I ' — 
where  another  does  the  word  torment.  —  '  Wilt  thou  torment 
us  before  the  time  ? '  Compare  Mark  1 :  24  and  Matt.  v  :  29. 
God  said  that  in  the  flood  he  would  destroy  man  with  the 
earth  (Gen.  6:  23).  but  the  earth  did  not  cease  to  be. 
Therefore  we  learn  that  these  words  cannot  set  aside  the 
declarations  that  the  wicked  shall  go  away  into  everlasting 
punishment.  &c. 

"If  the  word  death  implies  that  there  can  be  no  part  of 
the  man  then  conscious,  it  would  follow  that,  when  Christ 
died,  there  could  be  no  part  of  Him  that  was  conscious  : 
and  if  there  could  be  no  part  of  Christ  conscious  after  his 
body  was  dead,  there  could  have  been  no  part  of  Christ  con- 
scious before  he  was  born  of  Mary.  Death,  therefore,  can 
only  apply  to  the  body.  But  that  doctrine,  carried  out. 
must  lead  to  a  denial  of  the  divinity  of  Christ;  and  we  find 
that  in  all  past  history,  in  the  different  periods  when  it  has 
come  up  for  a  time,  it  has  been  connected  with  that  and 
other  heresies. 

••  The  calling  of  all  churches,  that  do  not  embrace  the  doc- 
trine of  the  advent.  Babylon.  I  before  remarked  was  the 
means  of  our  not  being  listened  to  with  candor:  and.  also, 
that  I  regarded  it  as  a  perversion  of  Scripture.     This  I  think 


ERRONEOUS   VIEWS.  335 

all  will  sec  who  compare  Rev.  14  and  18,  and  observe  the 
chronology  of  the  fall  of  Babylon. 

"  Rev.  14:  6,  7,  represents  an  angel  flying  in  the  midst 
of  heaven,  proclaiming  the  hour  of  God's  judgment  as  having 
come.  This  proclamation  must,  of  course,  continue  until 
Christ  shall  actually  come  to  judge  the  quick  and  dead 
at  his  appearing  and  kingdom.  In  the  8th  verse,  another 
angel  follows,  crying,  '  Babylon  is  fallen ;  '  but,  as  the  first 
continues  till  Christ  comes,  this  cannot  follow  till  Christ 
comes.  But,  on  turning  to  Rev.  18  :  1,  2,  we  find  that  the 
angel  that  follows,  crying  £  Babylon  is  fallen,'  is  one  that 
comes  dow7n  from  heaven,  having  great  power,  and  lightens 
the  earth  with  his  glory.  This  angel  that  follows  must  there- 
fore be  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  descending  from  heaven  to  take 
the  kingdom ;  and  when  he  takes  to  himself  his  great  power 
to  reign,  Satan  is  no  longer  the  God  of  this  world.  It  may 
then  be  well  said,  Babylon  is  fallen  ;  i.  e.,  it  has  lost  the 
supremacy ;  Christ  has  taken  that.  But  while  it  has  fallen, 
it  is  not  destroyed ;  before  that  can  be  done  the  saints  must 
be  taken  out,  that  they  may  not  partake  of  the  consequences 
of  her  sins,  nor  receive  of  her  plagues,  wrhich  shall  be  poured 
out  when  Great  Babylon  shall  come  in  remembrance  before 
God,  to  give  unto  her  the  cup  of  the  wine  of  the  fierceness 
of  his  wrath.  When  the  angel  has  cried  i  the  hour  of  his 
judgment  come,'  and  the  angel  has  come  down  from  heaven, 
declaring  the  fall  of  Babylon,  then,  in  Rev.  14 :  9 — 12, 
another  angel  follows,  pronouncing  the  fate  of  the  worship- 
pers of  the  beast,  which  they  are  to  experience  when  the  cup 
is  poured  upon  them ;  then,  in  v.  13,  a  voice  is  heard  from 
heaven,  declaring  those  who  died  in  the  Lord  blessed  from 
thenceforth.  The  time  has  then  come  when  the  dead  are  to  be 
raised  ;  and  this  must  synchronize  w7ith  the  voice  from  heaven 
in  Rev.  18:4,  saying,  '  Come  out  of  her,  my  people.'  To 
come,  is  to  go  in  the  direction  of  the  invitation.  It  must, 
therefore,  be  the  invitation,  from  where  Christ  will  then  have 
come,  to  meet  him  in  the  air. 

"  In  Rev.  14  :  14 — 16,  Christ  is  symbolized  as  seated  on 

a  cloud  ;  the  cry  is  given  to  reap  the  earth,  and  the  earth  is 

reaped ;  the  saints  are  caught  up  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the 

air.     Then,  in  verses  17 — 20,  the  vine  of  the  earth  is  reaped 

29* 


836  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM   MILLER, 

and  cast  into  the  wine-press  of  God's  wrath;  Babylon  is 
thus  destroyed. 

"Thus  we  have  a  harmonious  view  of  those  Scriptures. 
If  this  is  the  correct  application,  to  apply  them  differently  is 
to  pervert  them.  And  if  it  is,  then  everything,  of  whatever 
name,  that  is  conformed  to  this  world,  that  loves  this  world 
more  than  the  kingdom  of  God,  must  have  its  portion  with 
it ;  it  is  Babylonish. 

"The  'woman,'  or  mystical  Babylon,  I  regard  as  the 
fallen  church,  that  ruled  by  means  of  the  kings  of  the  earth ; 
and  all  churches  that  have  the  papal  spirit  of  formality  or 
jjer secution  are  partaking  of  her  abominations.  But  it  does 
not  therefore  follow  that  there  can  be  no  churches  that  love 
the  Lord  in  sincerity. 

"Intimately  connected  with  the  construction  which  has 
been  given  to  this  portion  of  God's  word  is  a  notion  respect- 
ing the  writing  out  of  our  belief.  It  is  said  by  some  to  be 
Babylon  to  be  associated  together,  to  write  out  a  synopsis  of 
our  belief,  or  to  subscribe  our  names  to  our  opinions.  I  am 
never  afraid  to  put  my  name  to  whatever  I  may  believe  ;  and 
I  can  find  no  text  of  Scripture  that  forbids  it.  When  the 
Jews  went  up  from  the  Babylonian  captivity,  they  made  a 
sure  covenant,  and  wrote  it,  and  the  princes,  Levites,  and 
priests,  sealed  unto  it.  —  Neh.  9  :  38. 

"  With  regard  to  the  association  of  the  church,  her  prac- 
tice has  varied  in  different  ages,  according  to  the  circum- 
stances in  which  she  has  been  placed.  When  all  thought 
alike,  or  understood  the  Bible  alike,  there  was  no  necessity 
for  an  expression  of  opinion  respecting  its  meaning.  But 
when  heresy  crept  in,  it  was  necessary  to  guard  the  meaning 
of  Scripture,  by  expressing,  in  plain  and  unequivocal  lan- 
guage, our  understanding  of  it.  It  is  because  the  early 
Christians  did  this  that  we  are  enabled  to  ascertain  the  un- 
derstanding which  the  primitive  church  had  of  the  faith  once 
delivered  to  the  saints.  When  this  has  not  been  done,  the 
history  of  the  church  shows  that  error  has  spread  with  the 
greatest  rapidity.  For  instance,  Theodore  Parker,  among 
the  Unitarians,  celebrated  for  his  transcendentalism,  takes 
ground  that  his  brethren  have  not  the  right  to  disfellowship 
him  on  account  of  his  constructions  of  Scripture ;  and,  as 
they  have  heretofore  denied  the  right  of  the  church  to  ex- 


HIS   COURSE   JUSTIFIED.  8C7 

press  its  belief,  they  must,  on  their  own  ground,  fellowship 
him  with  all  his  infidel  sentiments ;  for  the  dispute  between 
them  respects  only  interpretations  of  Scripture.  To  guard 
against  such  evils,  I  am  in  favor,  where  erroneous  views  pre- 
vail, of  expressing  my  understanding  of  the  Word  in  such 
plain  terms  that  all  may  be  able  to  compare  my  views  with 
the  Bible,  and  see  whether  I  make  a  faithful  application  of 
it.  And  if  the  world  wishes  to  see,  in  short,  the  peculiar 
characteristics  of  my  faith,  and  of  those  who  associate  with 
me,  I  see  no  harm  in  giving,  as  did  the  Mutual  Conference 
of  Adventists  at  Albany,  a  synopsis  of  the  views  in  which 
we  can  unite  and  act,  and  which,  among  others,  we  believe 
the  Bible  teaches. 

"  I  have  thus  given  a  plain  and  simple  statement  of  the 
manner  of  my  arriving  at  the  views  I  have  inculcated,  with 
a  history  of  my  course  up  to  the  present  time.  That  I  have 
been  mistaken  in  the  time,  I  freely  confess  ;  and  I  have  no 
desire  to  defend  my  course  any  further  than  I  have  been 
actuated  by  pure  motives,  and  it  has  resulted  to  God's  glory. 
My  mistakes  and  errors  God,  I  trust,  will  forgive.  I  cannot, 
however,  reproach  myself  for  having  preached  definite  time ; 
for,  as  I  believe  that  whatsoever  was  written  aforetime  was 
written  for  our  learning,  the  prophetic  periods  are  as 
much  a  subject  of  investigation  as  any  other  portion  of  the 
Word. 

"  I,  therefore,  still  feel  that  it  was  my  duty  to  present  all 
the  evidence  that  was  apparent  to  my  mind ;  and  were  I  now 
in  the  same  circumstances,  I  should  be  compelled  to  act  as 
I  have  done.  I  should  not,  however,  have  so  done,  had  I 
seen  that  the  time  would  pass  by ;  but  not  knowing  that  it 
would,  I  feel  even  now  more  satisfaction  in  having  Avarned 
my  fellow-men  than  I  should  feel,  were  I  conscious  that  I 
had  believed  them  in  danger  and  had  not  raised  my  voice. 
How  keen  would  have  been  my  regret,  had  I  refrained  to  pre- 
sent what  in  my  soul  I  believed  to  be  truth,  and  the  result 
had  proved  that  souls  must  perish  through  my  neglect !  I 
cannot,  therefore,  censure  myself  for  having  conscientiously 
performed  what  I  believed  to  be  my  duty. 

"  But  while  I  frankly  acknowledge  my  disappointment  in 
the  exact  time,  I  wish  to  inquire  whether  my  teachings  have 
been  thereby  materially  affected.     My  view  of  exact  time 


338  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

depended  entirely  upon  the  accuracy  of  chronology  ;  of  this 
I  had  no  absolute  demonstration :  but  as  no  evidence  was 
presented  to  invalidate  it,  I  deemed  it  my  duty  to  rely  on  it 
as  certain,  until  it  should  be  disproved.  Besides.  I  not  only 
rested  on  received  chronology,  but  I  selected  the  earliest 
dates  in  the  circle  of  a  few  years  on  which  chronologers  have 
relied  for  the  date  of  the  events  from  which  to  reckon, 
because  I  believed  them  to  be  best  sustained,  and  because  I 
wished  to  have  my  eye  on  the  earliest  time  at  which  the 
Lord  might  be  expected.  Other  chronologers  had  assigned 
later  dates  for  the  events  from  which  I  reckoned  ;  and  if 
they  are  correct  we  are  only  brought  into  the  circle  of  a  few 
years,  during  which  we  may  rationally  look  for  the  Lord's 
appearing.  As  the  prophetic  periods,  counting  from  the 
dates  from  which  I  have  reckoned,  have  not  brought  us  to 
the  end,  and  as  I  cannot  tell  the  exact  time  that  chronology 
may  vary  from  my  calculations,  I  can  only  live  in  continual 
expectation  of  the  event.  I  am  persuaded  that  I  cannot  be 
far  out  of  the  way,  and  I  believe  that  God  will  still  justify 
my  preaching  to  the  world. 

"  With  respect  to  other  features  of  my  views,  I  can  see 
no  reason  to  change  my  belief.  We  are  living  under  the 
last  form  of  the  divided  fourth  kingdom,  which  brings  us  to 
the  end.  The  prophecies  which  were  to  be  fulfilled  previous 
to  the  end  have  been  so  far  fulfilled  that  I  find  nothing  in 
them  to  delay  the  Lord's  coming.  The  signs  of  the  times 
thicken  on  every  hand ;  and  the  prophetic  periods  must  cer- 
tainly, I  think,  have  brought  us  into  the  neighborhood  of 
the  event. 

"  There  is  not  a  point  in  my  belief  in  which  I  am  not  sus- 
tained by  some  one  of  the  numerous  writers  who  have 
opposed  my  views.  Prof.  Bush,  the  most  gentlemanly  of 
my  opponents,  admits  that  I  am  correct  in  the  time,  with  the 
exception  of  the  precise  day  or  year ;  and  this  is  all  for 
which  I  contend.  That  the  70  weeks  are  490  years,  and 
the  1260  and  2300  days  are  so  many  years,  are  admitted 
by  Messrs.  Bush,  Hinton,  and  Jarvis.  That  the  2300  days 
and  70  weeks  commence  at  the  same  time,  Prof.  Bush  does 
not  deny.  And  Dr.  Jarvis  admits  that  the  former  carry  us 
to  the  resurrection  and  judgment.  Prof.  Bush,  Dr.  Jarvis, 
Mr.  Hinton  and  Mr.  Morris,  admit  that  the  legs  of  iron  and 


EXHORTATION.  389 

fourth  beast  are  Rome,  and  that  the  little  horn  of  Daniel 
7th  is  Papacy,  white  Dr.  Jarvis  and  Mr.  Hinton  admit  that 
the  exceeding  great  horn  of  Daniel  8th  is  Rome.  The  literal 
resurrection  of  the  body,  the  end  of  the  world,  and  a  per- 
sonal coming  of  Christ,  have  not  een  questioned  by  several 
who  have  written  against  me. 

"  Thus  there  is  not  a  point  for  which  I  have  contended 
that  has  not  been  admitted  by  some  of  those  who  have  writ- 
ten  to  disprove  my  opinions.  I  have  candidly  weighed  the 
objections  advanced  against  these  views  ;  but  I  have  seen  no 
arguments  that  were  sustained  by  the  Scriptures  that,  in  my 
opinion,  invalidated  my  position.  I  cannot,  therefore,  con- 
scientiously refrain  from  looking  for  my  Lord,  or  from  ex- 
horting my  fellow-men,  as  I  have  opportunity,  to  be  in 
readiness  for  that  great  event.  For  my  indiscretions  and 
errors  I  ask  pardon ;  and  all  who  have  spoken  evil  of  me 
without  cause  I  freely  forgive.  My  labors  are  principally 
ended.  I  shall  leave  to  my  younger  brethren  the  task  of 
contending  for  the  truth.  Many  years  I  toiled  alone  ;  God 
has  now  raised  up  those  who  will  fill  my  place.  I  shall  not 
cease  to  pray  for  the  spread  of  truth. 

"  In  conclusion,  suffer  a  word  of  exhortation.  You,  my 
brethren,  who  are  called  by  the  name  of  Christ,  will  you  not 
examine  the  Scriptures  respecting  the  nearness  of  the  Ad- 
vent ?  The  great  and  good  of  all  ages  have  had  their  minds 
directed  to  about  this  period  of  time,  and  a  multitude  are 
impressed  with  the  solemn  conviction  that  these  are  emphat- 
ically the  last  days.  Is  not  a  question  of  such  moment 
worthy  of  your  consideration  ?  I  do  not  ask  you  to  embrace 
an  opinion  of  mine ;  but  I  ask  you  to  weigh  wrell  the  evi- 
dence contained  in  the  Bible.  .  If  I  am  in  any  error,  I  desire 
to  see  it,  and  I  should  certainly  renounce  it ;  but  do  look 
at  the  question,  and,  in  view  of  the  teachings  of  the  inspired 
Word,  decide  for  eternity. 

"  What  shall  I  say  to  my  unconverted  friends  ?  I  have 
faithfully  exhorted  you  these  many  years  to  believe  in 
Christ ;  you  have  excused  yourselves.  What  can  I  say 
more  2  Will  not  all  the  considerations  that  are  presented  in 
the  Scriptures  of  truth  move  your  hearts  to  lay  down  the 
weapons  of  your  rebellion  ?  You  have  no  lease  of  your 
lives,  and,  if  the  Lord  should  not  come,  your  eyes  may  be 


340  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

soon  closed  in  death.  Why  will  you  not  improve  the 
present  moment,  and  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come  ?  Go  to 
Christ.  I  beseech  you  ;  lay  hold  on  the  promise  of  God, 
trust  in  his  grace,  and  he  will  cleanse  you  by  his  blood. 

"  I  would  exhort  my  Advent  brethren  to  study  the  Word 
diligently.  Let  no  man  spoil  you  through  philosophy  and 
vain  deceit.  Avoid  everything  that  shall  cause  offence.  Let 
your  lives  be  models  of  goodness  and  propriety.  Let  the 
adversary  get  no  advantage  over  you.  We  have  been  dis- 
appointed :  but  disappointments  will  work  for  our  good,  if  we 
make  the  right  use  of  them.  Be  faithful.  Be  vigilant. 
Exhort  with  all  long-suffering  and  patience.  Let  your  con- 
versation be  in  heaven,  from  whence  you  look  for  the  blessed 
hope.  Avoid  unnecessary  controversy  and  questions  that 
gender  strifes.  Be  not  many  masters ;  all  are  not  compe- 
tent to  advise  and  direct,  God  will  raise  up  those  to  whom 
he  will  commit  the  direction  of  his  cause.  Be  humble,  be 
watchful,  be  patient,  be  persevering.  And  may  the  God  of 
peace  sanctify  you  wholly,  and  preserve  you  blameless  unto 
the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ !  William  Miller. 

"  Low  Hampton,  August  1,  1845." 


CHAPTER    XXIII. 

THE     VALUE     OF     FAITH  UNFINISHED     LETTER  —  VISIT     TO     NEW 

YORK     CITY,     PHILADELPHIA,     ETC. ADDRESS     TO     THE     PUBLIC 

VISIT    TO    CANADA,    ETC. 

In-  the  month  of  September  Mr.  Miller  attended  confer- 
ences in  Addison  and  Bristol,  Vt,  and  lectured  in  each 
place.  He  then  took  a  journey  into  Connecticut,  and  visited 
Hartford,  attended  a  camp-meeting  in  Newington,  near 
Hartford,  and  one  at  Square  Pond,  in  Tolland  county.  He 
then  visited  Middletown.  He  was  much  pleased  with  his 
journey,  and  returned  home  refreshed. 

After  this,  in  connection  with  Elder  A.  Hale,  he  lectured, 
in  November  in  the  State  of  Vermont,  at  Waterbury.  Mor- 


THE   VALUE    OF   FAITH.  341 

ristown,  Stowe,  Waitesfield  and  Burlington.  Besides  at 
these  places,  he  seems  to  have  labored  but  little  during  the 
remainder  of  the  year.  He  occasionally  communicated  arti- 
cles for  the  Advent  Herald,  giving  expositions  of  Scripture, 
etc. :  but  the  approaching  infirmities  of  age  admonished  him 
that  his  labors  were  nearly  ended.  On  the  11th  of  Decem- 
ber, lie  wrote : 

"  I  am  much  troubled  with  my  old  complaint.  Bless  the 
Lord,  I  hope  to  be  with  him  soon,"  &c. 

On  Christmas  Day  he  communicated  the  following  : 

"  THE   VALUE    OF    FAITH. 

"  Brother  Himes  :  —  I  send  you  a  few  of  my  Christmas 
thoughts,  in  verse ;  they  are  the  simple  effusions  of  my  heart, 
and  can  claim  no  merit  beyond  a  medium  of  expressing  my 
joys  and  sorrows.  Was  the  dear  Saviour  born  1847  years 
ago  to-nio-ht  'I  Some  think  he  was.  Did  the  angels  sing  the 
Christmas  chant,  '  Peace  on  earth  and  good  will  to  men/  18-17 
years  ago  ?  If  I  could  know7  this  fact  I  would  believe  that, 
before  another  Christmas.  I  should  hear,  as  did  the  shepherds 
in  Judea,  the  same  voices,  chanting  l  Glory  on  earth  !  Halle- 
lujah !  The  King  of  Glory  comes  to  dwell  with  men  below ! ' 
This  would  be  glory;  the  thought  that  it  may  be  so  fills  me 
with  joy  unspeakable.  I  hope  it  is  true.  I  do  believe  the 
Bible  ;  if  that 's  not  true,  there  's  nothing  true  on  earth. 

"  Faith  looks,  the  heavens  resplendent  shine  ; 

Its  opening  portals  bring  to  view 
Things  past  and  present,  age  and  time, 

God's  vast  creation,  old  and  new. 
Look  up,  my  soul !  why  grovel  here, 
When  glories  such  in  heaven  appear  ? 

"  See  on  yon  throne,  in  dazzling  white, 

The  Son  of  Man  with  God  is  crowned,  — 

Diffusing  gracious  heat  and  light 
To  myriad  living  creatures  round  ! 

Come,  0  my  Faith  !  look  up  and  see  — 

This  man,  Christ  Jesus,  died  for  thee  ! 

"  Upon  his  brow,  once  crowned  with  thorns, 
Grace  now  sits  smiling  —  how  divine  ! 

And  whispers  '  peace,'  amidst  the  storms 
That  rack  this  troubled  breast  of  mine. 

Faith  hears  the  word,  and  doth  impart 

Sweet  consolation  to  my  heart. 


342  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

"  When  weak,  the  tempter  me  assails, 

And  draws  my  love  from  Christ  astray  ; 

He  speaks  in  love,  no  promise  fails, 
'Come  back,  my  child,  I  am  the  way.' 

Faith  forsakes  all  these  worldly  charms, 

And  brings  my  soul  back  to  his  arms. 

*'  When,  filled  with  doubts,  for  sins  I  mourn, 

And  Satan's  darts  upon  me  fall,  — 

When,  full  of  tears,  my  heart  is  torn, 

And  longs  for  help,  on  Him  I  call ; 

'  Fear  not,'  He  says,  and  Faith  relies 

On  promises  which  he  supplies. 

"  When  Death,  the  tyrant,  claims  his  due, 

And  threatens  to  devour  his  prey, 
It  fills  my  soul  with  dread  to  view 

The  cold,  dark  tomb,  and  mouldering  clay  ; 
Faith  hears  His  voice  say,  '  Soul,  come  home  ! 
The  battle  's  fought,  the  victory  won  ! 

"  If  war  and  famine  fill  the  land, 

And  pestilence  and  flame  should  be, — 

Robbers  and  thieves  join  hand  in  hand, 
Scoffers  and  mobs  should  all  agree,  — 

These  would  be  evidence  for  faith  : 

I  credit  what  my  Master  saith. 

"  Go,  then,  ye  sceptics,  laugh  and  sneer  ; 

Your  time  for  sport  will  soon  be  o'er  ; 
The  Judge  himself  will  soon  appear, 

And  your  vain  boasts  be  heard  no  more. 
Faith  sees  the  end,  and  weeps  for  you, 
Repent  and  love, — believe  him  too. 

"  If  those,  who  once  companions  were 

In  my  lone  pilgrimage  below, 
Should  leave  me,  and  become  a  snare 

To  draw  me  to  the  pit  of  woe, 
Faith  bids  me  fly  from  earthly  rest, 
And  cast  my  burthen  on  his  breast. 

"  Faith  hears  the  word  Jehovah  speaks, 
Faith  sees  the  way  that  Jesus  trod,  — 
Faith,  by  the  Spirit,  praying  seeks 

The  truth  by  faith  that  leads  to  God. 
By  Faith  we  tread  this  thorny  grove, 
Through  Faith  and  Hope,  to  Christ  above. 

"  William  Miller. 
"  Low  Hampton,  Dec.  25?  1845." 

He  left,  among  his  MSS.,  the  following  fragment,  which 
was  probably  commenced  as  a  New  Year's  communication  to 
those  addressed : 


UNFINISHED   LETTER.  343 

"  Low  Hampton,  Dec.  1845. 
"To  the  dear  brethren  who  love  the  appearing  of  our 
dear  and  precious  Saviour  Jesus  Christ : 

"  Let  me  address  you  in  love,  with  the  affection  of  one 
who  has  been  often  refreshed  by  your  readiness  to  hear, 
believe,  and  obey  the  truth,  and  has  taken  sweet  counsel 
with  many  of  you  in  the  house  of  God, —  where  our  faith 
has  been  more  and  more  established  by  the  word  of  his  grace, 
—  where  our  prayers  were  mingled  at  the  same  altar,  and 
have  arisen  in  the  same  cloud  of  incense  to  the  mercy-seat  of 
our  Redeemer, — where  our  hearts  burned  with  the  same  love 
and  gratitude  to  God  for  the  good  and  glorious  news  of  the 
near  approach  of  the  King  of  kings, —  where  our  songs  of 
praise  and  hallelujahs  to  the  Lamb,  in  unison  and  sweet 
harmony,  cheered  our  drooping  spirits,  while,  like  strangers 
and  pilgrims,  we  expected  soon  —  yes.  very  soon  —  to  reach 
the  long-sought  and  promised  rest ;  —  where  heart  mingled 
with  heart,  soul  with  soul,  and  love  with  love,  holy,  heav- 
enly and  divine,  uniting  us  in  the  oneness  of  gospel  truth ;  — 
where  prejudice  and  party  names  were  dissipated  like  the 
midnight  fogs  by  the  morning  sun, —  and  where,  may  I  not 
say,  we  learned  the  first  practical  lesson  of  gospel  union  ! 

"Were  we  wrong  then?  If  so,  then  wrong  will  give  a 
love  as  holy  as  angels  breathe,  and  pure  as  the  water  of  life. 
Who  was  our  Master  then  ?  —  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  at  the 
door.  Who  claimed  preeminence  above  his  fellows  then? 
None.  Like  little  children,  we  sucked  the  honeyed  flower  and 
ate  the  naked  truth.  The  Bible !  —  a  precious  book  !  The 
Bible  !  —  no  treasure  on  the  earth  was  prized  like  that !  We 
knew  our  friends  and  brethren  by  this  Book  of  books.  If  we 
met  a  stranger,  and  in  his  pocket,  hand,  or  heart,  we  found  a 
Bible,  we  called  him  brother;  and  even  the  infidel  would 
call  him  opprobrious  names  which  they  had  affixed  to  us. 

"  That  looked  and  seemed  like  the  apostolic  age.  But  0, 
how  short !  The  spirits  of  the  dark  abyss  were  moved  to 
spoil,  if  possible,  this  holy,  happy  union  of  gospel  love.  The 
base  and  sordid  hypocrites  from  east  to  west  began  to  foam 
and  fret ;  the  bigots  all  began  to  scowl  and  sneer  ;  the  world 
began  to  rage.  The  man-made  wisdom  and  worldly  great- 
ness of  the  earth  began  to  shake  the  drowsy  spirits  of  their 
titled  champions,  and  they  arose  to  combat  —  what?  —  a 
30 


344  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

Bible  doctrine,  a  long-acknowledged  truth,  a  part  of  all 
their  creeds  from  ages  framed  !  Scoffs  and  ridicule,  for  a 
season,  flew,  thick  as  hailstones,  in  every  direction.  But 
this  mode  of  warfare  only  caused  the  valiant  soldiers  of  the 
Advent  banner  to  buckle  on  their  armor  strong  and  firm, 
and  tread  the  myriads  of  this  army  in  the  dust ;  and  thus, 
through  God,  we  conquered  valiantly. 

"  The  war  was  changed.  The  mighty  heads  of  human 
creeds  came  forth, —  some  clad  in  mitred  crowns  and  sur- 
pliced  gowns,  in  college  robes  and  doctors'  caps,  in  presi- 
dential chairs  and  professors'  seats, —  with  their  retainers, 
serfs  and  allies,  to  shout  the  victory  before  the  battle  was 
won.  Those  who  saw  this  mighty  host  can  but  remember 
what  a  cloud  of  dust  was  raised.  A  cry  went  forth  like  the 
war-whoop  of  the  native  Americans.  The  earth  trembled ; 
the  heavens  shook.  Some  of  these  champions  were  armed 
with  a  weapon  forged  by  the  pagan  Vulcan,  and  polished 
by  German  ingenuity,  and  supposed,  by  their  followers,  to 
be  as  invincible  as  the  club  of  Hercules.  The  multitude 
looked  to  see  the  little  Advent  band  demolished  at  a  blow. 
Many  who  had  made  up  their  minds,  on  the  first  opportu- 
nity which  might  look  favorable  to  them,  to  unite  their 
interest  with  the  little  flock,  hearing  the  dreadful  din  made 
by  this  heterogeneous  mass,  through  fear  fled,  and  joined 
the  ranks  of  the  approaching  foe.  Many  who  had  been 
lingering  around  the  camp  for  the  loaves  and  fishes,  now 
forsook  them,  and  became  deserters  and  informers  in  the 
enemy's  camp.  Nevertheless,  the  little  band  had  a  goodly 
number  of  valiant  souls,  who  had  taken  a  bird's-eye  view 
of  the  approaching  army,  had  concluded  to  intrench  them- 
selves behind  the  enemy's  own  castle,  built  of  human 
creeds,  and  called,  by  themselves,  the  Temple  of  Orthodoxy. 

1 ''  This  temple  had  a  number  of  pillars,  built,  as  was  sup- 
posed, of  true  Grecian  and  Italian  marble.  One  of  these 
pillars  was  named  the  pillar  of  judgment ;  another,  the 
personal  coming  ;  a  third,  the  resurrection ;  the  fourth, 
the  kingdom  of  God  ;  the  fifth,  the  reign  of  the  saints  ; 
the  sixth  was  the  end  of  the  world ;  and  the  seventh,  the 
burning  day  ;  with  others  of  less  importance. 

"  Other  pillars  had  been  erected  long  since  the  temple 
was  first  built,   and  these  were  made  of  hay,  wood  and 


LETTER   TO    MR.    IIIMES.  345 

stubble,  and  were  plastered  and  painted  in  imitation  of 
marble,  so  that  they  were  called  by  the  vulgar  the  new 
marble  pillars,  and  were  considered  a  part  of  the  original 
temple.  One  of  these  modern  pillars  was  named  '  conver- 
sion of  the  world*  This  pillar  stood  by  the  side  of  another 
called  l  theological  schools,'  and  both  together  supported 
one  of  the  main  arches  of  the  modern  part  of  the  building. 
On  the  right  stood  l  temporal  millennium f  and  in  its 
neighborhood  was  '  J  exes'  return.''  Scattered  in  every  di- 
rection were  smaller  and  insignificant  ones,  reared  up  by 
private  individuals, — negative  pillars,  which  bore  no  weight, 
yet  served  to  confuse  and  perplex  the  worshippers.  These 
were  such  as  i  no  heaven,'1  -no  hell,'  'no  consciousness 
after  death,'  '  no  judgment  in  the  future,'  '  no  resurrection,' 
' no  punishment,'  'no  spirit,'  'no  future  existence  of  the 
wicked,'  'no  personal  Christ,'  'no  personal  coming,'  'no 
kingdom,  only  in  men's  hearts,'  &c. 

' '  In  this  temple  the  battle  begun.  In  a  few  moments 
the  imitation  pillars  and  paper  walls  were  prostrate  in  the 
dust ;  and  many  noble  warriors  were  overthrown,  and  lay 
in  confused  masses  among  the  heaps  of  broken  columns  and 
paper  rubbish  which  had  been  profusely  scattered  in  the 
field.  During  this  battle  the  little  band  of  Aclventists  had 
stood  their  ground  behind  the  marble  pillars,  which  for  ages 
have  stood  the  shocks  of  war,  although  the  champions  of  the 
attacking  foe  tried  their  weapons  on  these  ancient  columns. 
One  attacked  the  'resurrection'  pillar,  and  would  have 
demolished  it  even  with  the  ground,  had  his  strength  been 
equal  to  His  who  reared  the  same  in  ancient  days.  Others 
tried  to  demolish  the  pillar  of  '  prophetic  chronology ; '  but 
this  stood  the  strokes  of  many  a  daring  and  presumptuous 
warrior,  and  is"     .     .     . 

It  was  left  thus  unfinished, —  something,  probably,  hav- 
ing interrupted  its  completion. 

On  the  13th  of  January  he  again  wrote  : 

"Dear  Brother  Himes:  —  I  am  yet  in  this  land  of 
toil,  where  sin  has  spoiled  all  the  blessings  and  enjoyments 
of  earth,  which  were  appointed  by  our  beneficent  Creator 
for  the  best  good  of  his  creatures,  and  which,  had  it  not 


346  LIFE   0E   WILLIAM  MILLER. 

been  for  sin,  would  have  led  us  to  reverence  and  adore  that 
Being  who  had  produced,  by  his  power,  this  earth  and  all  its 
appurtenances,  and  placed  in  it  man  —  rational,  intelligent, 
social  man  —  to  enjoy  this  vast  and  wondrous  piece  of 
mechanism. 

"  Perhaps  we  are  unable  rightly  to  appreciate  the  bless- 
ings which  were  placed  within  the  reach  of  man  at  his 
creation,  when  '  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy.'  Yet  I 
think  that  we  do  realize  some  of  the  evils  which  man  is  heir 
to  by  reason  of  £  sin,  and  death  by  sin,'  which  have  entered 
the  world.  How  manifest  it  is,  at  the  present  day,  that  all 
the  influences  of  the  pit  are  inciting  men  to  crime,  bringing 
in  their  trail  consequences  ten-fold  more  dreadful  than  those 
entailed  upon  us  by  the  sin  of  our  first  parents  !  If  there 
were  one  spark  of  philanthropy  existing  in  the  world,  me- 
thinks  it  must  bleed  at  beholding  the  rapid  increase  of  evil 
within  the  last  few  years. 

"  I  confess  that  to  me  it  would  be  but  a  dismal  and 
appalling  prospect  in  the  future,  did  not  a  ray  of  light 
beam  forth  from  the  Word  of  God,  that  there  should  be  a 
glorious  and  final  renovation  of  all  things  !  This  '  exceeding 
great  and  precious  promise,'  to  the  man  of  God,  is  the  only 
hope  that  cheers  him  in  his  weary  pilgrimage.  Every 
means  that  the  wisdom  of  man  could  devise  for  the  meliora- 
tion of  the  condition  of  man  has  failed ;  ministers  of  the 
gospel  have  been  sent  into  every  land ;  Bibles  have  been 
scattered  broadcast  in  the  earth,  translated  into  almost  every 
tongue,  and  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  poor,  '  without  money 
and  without  price ; '  schools  of  every  grade,  from  the  college 
to  the  common,  have  sprung  up,  in  which  have  been  de- 
veloped the  highest  mental  qualities  of  man ;  societies  have 
been  multiplied,  for  the  moral  improvement  of  our  race, — to 
Christianize  the  heathen,— to  reform  the  inebriate, —  to 
break  the  bonds  of  the  enslaved, —  to  liberate  the  debtor, — 
to  stop  the  horrid  practice  of  legal  murder, —  to  promote 
peace  among  nations, —  to  protect  the.  orphan, —  to  clothe 
the  naked, —  to  feed  the  hungry, —  to  nurse  the  sick,  and 
even  to  bury  the  dead.  These,  and  many  other  noble  and 
benevolent  enterprises,  have  been  formed  within  the  present 
century.  But  how  much  good  have  they  accomplished? 
That  great  good  has  been  done,  cannot  be  denied.     But  it  is 


LETTER   TO    MR.    IIDIES.  347 

likewise  true,  that  evil  has  predominated  in  a  far  greater 
ratio  than  at  any  former  period. 

"  When  I  look  back  to  the  period  when  we  began  to 
publish  the  news  of  a  coming  Saviour,  I  think  it  the  happiest 
time  of  my  life.  How  were  our  hearts  refreshed  by  the 
readiness  of  the  dear  brethren  in  Christ  to  hear,  believe,  and 
obey,  the  simple  gospel  of  the  kingdom  !  With  what 
delight  have  I,  in  company  with  many  of  the  dear,  anxious 
children  of  God,  read  and  re-read  the  Scriptures,  searched 
diligently  and  compared  the  prophets,  Jesus  Christ,  and  his 
apostles,  to  see  if  these  things  were  so  !  What  glorious  light 
I  have  often  seen  in  that  holy  book  while  thus  engaged ! 
And  with  what  joy  have  I  taken  sweet  communion  with 
kindred  hearts  in  the  house  of  God,  where  our  faith  was 
more  and  more  established  by  the  word  of  His  grace ;  where 
our  prayers  were  mingled  at  the  same  altar,  and  arose  to- 
gether, as  incense,  to  the  mercy-seat  of  our  Redeemer,  for  a 
preparation  to  meet  the  coming  glories,  which  we  then 
expected  shortly  to  realize ;  where  our  hearts  burned  with 
love  and  gratitude  to  God  for  the  good  news  of  the  near 
approach  of  the  King  of  kings  ;  where  our  songs  of  praise 
and  hallelujahs  to  the  Lamb  cheered  our  drooping  spirits, 
and  prepared  us  more  vigorously  to  pursue  our  weary  pil- 
grimage to  the  land  of  promise,  which,  from  evidence  to  us 
conclusive,  and  which  I  am  not  ashamed  of,  we  soon  expect 
to  reach  ! 

"  Then,  heart  beat  in  unison  with  heart,  soul  mingled 
with  soul,  and  love,  holy,  heavenly,  divine,  united  us  in  that 
oneness  of  gospel  truth,  and  prejudice  and  party  were  dissi- 
pated from  our  thoughts  like  midnight  darkness,  or  the 
morning  mists  by  the  rising  sun.  This  was  a  time  of  love, 
a  time  of  faith,  working  by  love  and  purifying  the  heart. 
It  was  this  hope,  l  the  blessed  hope,'  that  made  us  purify 
ourselves  from  our  sectarian  prejudices  and  bigotry. 

u  I  have  often  thought  that  we  then  enjoyed  a  foretaste 
of  the  love  and  fellowship  of  the  saints  in  light.  Why  is  it 
not  so  now  ?  The  reason  is  as  obvious  as  the  sun  at  noon- 
day. We  have  been  drawn  from  our  first  principles  by 
wicked  and  designing  men,  who  have  crept  in  among  us  and 
drawn  us  into  parties,  to  follow  men  instead  of  God,  and  to 
form  new  tests  instead  of  the  Bible.  Some  of  our  lecturers 
30* 


348  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM  MILLER. 

first  began  the  confusion,  by  declaring  an  unholy  crusade 
against  the  sects,  which  brought  in  men  of  blood  instead  of 
men  of  peace.  True,  after  the  manner  of  men,  the  sects 
had  provoked  us  to  the  course  we  took  by  all  the  wicked 
arts  and  misrepresentation  of  our  views  and  motives  that 
human  and  Satanic  agency  could  invent, — by  slanders,  ridi- 
cule, and  wresting  the  Word  of  God  from  the  meaning  which 
had  long  been  laid  down  in  their  own  creeds,  and  departing 
from  those  rules  by  which  their  fathers,  for  centuries,  had 
applied  mystic  Babylon  to  the  church  of  Rome.  We  were 
not  called,  in  my  humble  opinion,  to  engage  in  so  universal 
a  war.  I  think  we  have,  in  this,  '  left  our  first  principles,' 
which  were,  to  preach  the  blessed  hope,  and  beseech  men  to 
be  ready  for  the  i  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and 
our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ/  without  personal  or  denomi- 
national considerations.  While  we  pursued  this  course,  God 
blessed  us  in  our  work.  We  were  commanded  by  the  Word 
to  be  patient,  sober,  to  judge  not,  not  to  be  high-minded, 
but  to  fear,  and,  by  so  doing,  manifest  the  same  spirit  that 
was  in  Christ,  What  have  been  the  fruits  of  this  departure 
from  the  plain  line  of  duty  ?  Surely  they  have  not  been 
love,  peace,  and  joy,  such  as  we  formerly  experienced,  when 
we  believed  in  our  hearts  that  Christ  was  at  the  door.  On 
the  contrary,  it  has,  in  many  instances,  separated  those  who 
had  been  knit  together  in  the  closest  friendship,  fomented 
jealousies,  produced  '  lo  heres,  and  lo  theres ! '  while  some 
have  blasphemously  arrogated  to  themselves  names  and  titles 
which  belong  to  Christ.  With  such  I  have  no  sympathy, — ■ 
no  fellowship.  I  will  refer  them  to  Christ's  words,  Rev.  8 : 
3 :  — '  Remember,  therefore,  how  thou  hast  received  and 
heard,  and  hold  fast  and  repent.  If,  therefore,  thou  shalt 
not  watch,  I  will  come  on  thee  as  a  thief,  and  thou  shalt  not 
know  what  hour  I  will  come  upon  thee.' 

"  The  glorious  appearing  of  Christ  is  my  only  hope:  to 
this  I  cling, — it  is  my  anchor;  and  all  who  look  for  and 
love  his  appearing  are  my  brothers  and  sisters,  and  with 
such  I  have  fellowship  in  the  Lord,  and  exhort  them  to 
watch.  William  Miller. 

uLow  Hampton,  January  18,  1846." 

On  the  11th  of  March,  1846;  in  company  with  Messrs. 


PUBLIC  LECTURES.  349 

Himes  and  Apollos  Hale,  Mr.  M.  lectured  at  Glenn's  Falls, 
N.  Y.  It  does  not  appear  that  he  visited  any  other  place  till 
about  the  time  of  the  Annual  Conference,  which  met  in  New 
York  city  on  the  12th  of  May. 

His  bodily  infirmities  rendered  it  unsafe  for  him  to  journey 
without  the  attendance  of  some  one  to  render  him  all  needful 
assistance ;  therefore  he  arranged  with  Elder  Henry  Buckley, 
of  Hampton,  N.  Y.,  to  accompany  him  to  New  York  city. 

They  left  home  on  Saturday,  the  9th  of  May,  and  pro- 
ceeded as  far  as  Lansingburg,  N.  Y.  On  the  Sabbath  he 
went  to  Middletown,  N.  Y.,  where  he  preached  twice,  re- 
turning, after  service,  to  Lansingburg.  On  Monday,  the 
11th,  they  proceeded  to  New  York  city.  He  took  part  in 
the  debates  and  preaching  of  the  Conference,  and,  though 
feeble,  seemed  to  enjoy  the  meetings. 

After  its  adjournment,  they  visited  Philadelphia.  On 
Sunday,  the  17th,  he  preached  in  the  morning  and  evening 
to  large  and  attentive  congregations.  The  next  day  he 
visited  his  former  acquaintances,  and,  on  the  19th,  he  left 
for  Providence,  R.  I.  There  they  attended  a  meeting  of 
the  friends,  which  continued  four  days,  and  to  which  Mr.  M. 
preached  four  discourses,  with  his  usual  interest.  On  the 
25th  he  visited  North  Scituate,  R.  L,  and  gave  two  dis- 
courses. On  the  26th  he  preached  twice  in  North  Attle- 
boro',  Mass.,  and,  on  the  27th,  arrived  in  Boston.  The 
Annual  Conference  was  adjourned  from  New  York  to  meet 
there,  and  commenced  on  the  day  previous.  He  again  took 
part  in  its  debates,  but  spent  most  of  his  time  in  visiting 
friends  and  acquaintances  in  the  vicinity.  They  visited 
Westminster,  Mass.,  where  Mr.  M.  preached  on  the  3d  of 
June ;  and,  on  the  5th,  he  arrived  home,  much  fatigued  with 
his  journey,  but  in  good  health  and  spirits. 

On  the  24th  of  June,  in  company  with  Elder  Buckley, 
Mr.  M.  visited  Cranbury  Creek,  N.  Y.,  where  he  preached 
seven  discourses  in  four  days.  No  other  place  being  open 
for  the  meetings,  they  were  held  in  a  large  barn,  owned  by 
Judge  Gilbert.  It  was  comfortably  furnished  with  seats, 
and  accommodated  very  respectable  congregations,  composed 
of  the  more  intelligent  and  pious  portion  of  the  community. 
Mr.  M.'s  discourses  there  were  spoken  of  by  those  present 
as  logical  and  interesting. 


350  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

During  the  warm  months  he  attempted  no  public  labors ; 
and  his  pen,  even,  seems  to  have  lain  idle.  The  next  com- 
munication received  from  him  was  published  in  the  Advent 
Herald  of  September  9.  1846,  as  follows  : 

"address  to  the  public. 

"  Dear  Reader:  —  Permit  me  to  address  you  once 
more,  by  calling  your  attention  to  the  great  events  which 
the  word  of  God  declares  are  soon  to  come  to  pass,  that  I 
may  faithfully  perform  my  duty  ;  and  that  you  may  be  able 
to  answer,  in  that  way  which  will  be  satisfactory  to  your 
own  soul,  in  the  day  when  God  shall  judge  the  secret  thoughts 
of  men  by  Jesus  Christ. 

H  In  my  former  communications  to  you  on  this  subject, — ■ 
which  is  near  my  heart,  fills  my  soul  at  times  with  indescrib- 
able joy  and  consolation,  and  is  big  with  the  hope  of  soon, 
very  soon,  coming  into  possession  of  immortality  and  eternal 
life, —  I  readily  confess  I  was  misled  in  my  calculations  ; 
not  by  the  word  of  God,  nor  by  the  established  principles 
of  interpretation  I  adopted,  but  by  the  authorities  which  I 
followed  in  history  and  chronology,  and  which  have  been 
generally  considered  worthy  of  the  fullest  confidence.  And 
I  fear  many  of  you  have  been  blinded  to  your  own  interest, 
which  may  be  of  eternal  consequences  to  you,  by  hasty  ex- 
pressions of  full  confidence  in  these  authors,  before  I  had 
carefully  and  more  extensively  examined  the  subject  to 
which  I  had,  in  the  simplicity  of  my  heart,  called  your  can- 
did and  serious  attention. 

"  The  testimony  of  historians,  as  to  the  dates  of  events, 
cannot  affect  the  testimony  of  the  word  of  God,  that,  at 
certain  periods  from  these  events,  his  promises  shall  be  ful- 
filled. They  may  fail,  but  his  word  cannot  fail.  I  confess 
I  have  been  thus  mistaken  as  to  the  definite  time ;  but  what 
of  that  ?  Will  you  or  any  man  dare  to  take  the  ground 
that,  because  Mr.  Miller  or  any  other  man  made  a  mistake, 
the  word  of  God  is  not  true  ?  No,  no.  There  would  be 
nothing  in  that  worthy  of  being  called  an  argument. 

"  But,  above  all  things  else,  I  was  deceived  in  the  num- 
ber and  character  of  those  who,  without  study,  argument,  or 
reason,  rejected  the  (to  me  at  least)  glorious  news  of  the 
coming  Saviour,     Neither  did  I  suppose  that  a  man  or  wo- 


ADDRESS   TO    THE   PUBLIC.  351 

man  could  have  been  found  on  the  habitable  earth,  who  loved 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  believed  the  Bible,  that  would 
reject  the  Second  Advent  or  the  redemption  of  the  body ; 
the  final  salvation  of  the  soul,  or  the  inheritance  of  eternal 
life,  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ.  Yet  facts  warrant 
me  to  say,  I  find  more  than  one-half  who  profess  Christianity 
denjnng  one  or  more  of  these  fundamental  pillars  of  the 
Christian  hope. 

11 1  am  thankful  to  God,  although  much  and  sorely  disap- 
pointed, that  I  never  pretended  to  be  divinely  inspired,  but 
always  directed  you  to  the  same  source  from  which  I  obtained 
all  the  information  I  then  had  and  now  possess  on  this  glo- 
rious and  heart-cheering  subject.  Let  me,  then,  exhort 
you,  kind  reader,  by  the  value  of  truth,  by  the  worth  of 
your  own  soul,  and  the  love  of  life  everlasting,  to  examine 
your  Bible  on  the  coming  of  Christ,  the  redemption  of  the 
body,  the  salvation  of  your  soul,  and  the  everlasting  inherit- 
ance. Lay  by  all  prejudice,  all  opinions  not  founded  on  the 
plain  and  clear  declarations  of  God's  word  ;  keep  close  to  that 
rule  which  will  thoroughly  furnish  you,  and  make  you  per- 
fect in  every  good  work ;  examine  for  yourselves ;  let  no 
man  deceive  you  in  these  days  of  deception,  when  the  devil 
has  come,  deceiving^  if  possible,  the  very  elect.  Now  is  the 
time  for  you  to  exercise  the  '  sober  second  thought ;'  a  good 
time  for  you  to  come  over  on  the  side  of  truth,  to  choose  the 
good,  and  refuse  the  evil.  I  beseech  you  do  not  say,  ■  Nay, 
I  will  not  examine  ! '  Do  not  say,  '  I  am  well  enough  off, 
and  I  have  got  the  truth  ! '  Perhaps  you  have  ;  if  so,  it 
will  not  hurt  you  to  reexamine,  for  every  reexamination  only 
makes  the  truth  the  brighter,  our  evidence  more  clear,  and 
our  love  for  the  truth  more  fervent ;  it  helps  to  establish  our 
faith  and  hope,  and  keeps  us  from  wavering. 

"  And  now,  dear  reader,  let  me  propose  a  few  questions, 
in  view  of  what  I  have  said,  for  you  to  answer  to  God  and 
your  own  soul ;  and  I  pray  you  not  to  trifle  with  them,  or 
one  of  them,  if  you  can  find  a  plain  Scripture  text  which 
authorizes  the  question.  And  I  beg  of  you  delay  not  to 
answer  every  question  which  may  or  can  be  answered  ;  and 
let  your  answers  be  such  as  you  will  be  willing  to  meet  be- 
fore the  throne  of  God  in  the  day  of  judgment,  to  which  day 


852  LIFE    OF  WILLIAM   MILLEK. 

I  appeal  in  thus  addressing  you.     I  append  a  text  to  every 
question,  to  show  you  they  are  scriptural : 

"  1.  Will  Christ  appear  the  second  time?     Heb.  9  :  28. 

"  2.  Will  he  come  himself?     1  Thess.  4  :  16. 

"  2.  Who  will  see  him  ?     1  John  3:2;  Rev.  1 :  7. 

"  4.  Who  will  not  be  ashamed  before  him  at  his  coming? 

1  John  2  :  28  ;  4  :  17. 

11  5.  What  will  Christ  come  to  do?  2  Thess.  1 :  7—10  ; 
Heb.  1:  10—12;  Rev.  21:  5. 

•■  6.  When  Christ  comes  will  there  be  a  resurrection,  and 
of  whom  ?     1  Cor.  15  :  23  ;  1  Thess.  4  :  14—18. 

"  7.  Where  is  Christ  now  ?     Acts  1  :  11 ;  3  :  21. 

"8.  At  what  time  will  Christ  be  sent  again  to  earth  ? 
Acts  3  :  20,  21. 

"  9.  When  may  we  know  he  is  near,  even  at  the  door? 
Matt.  24  :  30,  33. 

"  10.  Has  any  one  of  the  signs  been  seen  which  are 
given  by  our  Lord  in  Matt.  24  :  29  ;  Mark  13  :  24,  25,  or 
Luke  21  :  25,  26  ;  or  by  Paul  in  1  Tim.  4  :  1—3  ;  also 

2  Tim.  3  :  1—9  ;  or  by  Peter  in  2  Pet.  3  :  3,  4,  by  any 
one  living  in  this  generation? 

"11.  When  is  the  day  of  redemption  ?  Eph.  4:  30; 
Luke  21 :  28. 

"  12.  When  shall  our  bodies  be  redeemed?  Rom.  8: 
23. 

"13.  When  shall  our  souls  be  saved?  1  Pet.  1  :  7 — 
13. 

"14.  When  shall  the  righteous  inherit  eternal  life? 
Mark  10  :  17;  Matt.  19  :  29;  25  :  46. 

"  15.  What  is  the  earnest  of  that  inheritance?  Eph.  1 : 
13,  14  ;  2  Cor.  1  :  22 ;  5  :  4,  5. 

"  16.  If  we  are  to  receive  all  this  when  Christ  appears, 
and  not  until  then,  can  you  blame  any  Christian  for  loving 
his  appearing  ?     2  Tim.  4:8. 

"17.  And,  if  you  were  commanded  to  watch  for  him, 
and  these  blessings  were  promised  when  he  comes,  would 
you  not  look  with  intense  interest  until  his  coming  ? 

"  18.  And,  if  you  were  commanded  to  watch,  would  you 
watch  without  expecting  him  ?     Luke  12  :   35—40. 

"  19.  And,  if  he  did  not  come  when  you  expected,  would 


TOUR   TO    CANADA.  353 

you  not  be  disappointed  in  some  proportion  to  your  love  for 
his  appearing  ? 

11  Remember  this  is  the  situation  of  your  Advent  friends  ; 
this  is  our  experience.  And  may  God  help  you  to  love, 
watch,  and  expect  the  dear  Saviour  until  he  shall  come. 

"William  Miller." 

On  the  4th  of  September,  in  view  of  many  contradictory 
opinions  afloat,  he  proffered  the  following  advice  : 

"  When  we  write  to  a  brother  to  complain  of  some  of  his 
opinions,  let  us  consider  of  it  three  days  before  we  write ; 
pray  God  nine  times  to  direct  us  before  we  take  up  the  pen ; 
read  it  in  the  room  of  our  brother  three  times  before  we 
send  it ;  seal  it  only  when  we  love  him  for  being  God-like  ; 
send  it  when  we  would  delight  to  be  the  bearer  ;  while  it  is 
going,  think  with  what  tears  of  joy  he.  will  devour  its  con- 
tents ;  and  remember  to  pay  postage." 

On  the  8th  of  September  Mr.  M.  commenced  a  tour  into 
Canada.  He  went  by  way  of  Lake  Champlain  to  Burling- 
ton, Vt,,  where  he  preached,  in  the  evening  of  that  day. 
There  he  met  Elder  Buckley,  who  accompanied  him  on  his 
tour.  From  this  place  they  went  to  Essex,  Vt.,  where  Mr. 
M.  gave  two  discourses.  On  the  12th,  they  commenced  a 
two  days'  meeting  in  Cambridge,  Vt.,  where  there  was  a 
good  attendance.  On  Tuesday,  the  15th,  they  commenced 
a  meeting  in  Montgomery,  Vt,,  which  continued  over  the 
following  Sabbath,  Mr.  Miller  generally  preaching  twice  a 
day. 

While  at  this  place  he  was  taken  with  a  severe  pain  in 
one  of  his  toes.  He  was  soon  relieved  of  that,  when  the 
pain  commenced  in  his  left  shoulder.  He  then  desired  to 
return  home,  but  was  persuaded  to  continue  his  journey. 
On  the  22d,  he  gave  two  discourses  in  South  Troy,  Vt. 
The  meeting  was  held  in  a  large  hall  which  had  formerly 
been  used  for  a  ball-room.  While  he  was  preaching  in  the 
evening,  the  windows  were  pelted  with  eggs,  clubs,  and 
stones,  thrown  by  some  "  rude  fellows  of  the  baser  sort," 
who  were  outside  of  the  building.  Some  of  their  missiles 
entered  the  room.  One  stone,  about  the  size  of  a  hen's  egg, 
struck  the  desk  in  front  of  Mr.  Miller,  where  he  was  speak- 
ing. He  paused,  and,  with  emphasis,  asked,  very  composedly  : 


354  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

"  Is  this  Vermont,  the  state  which  boasts  of  its  freedom, 
of  its  republicanism  ?     Shame  on  Vermont !  " 

The  audience  were  somewhat  agitated ;  but  he  requested 
them  to  be  quiet,  and  proceeded  with  his  discourse.  No  one 
was  injured,  and  good  evidently  resulted  from  the  interrup- 
tion ;  for  it  aroused  the  old  gentleman's  energy,  and  gave 
additional  interest  to  the  remainder  of  the  sermon. 

On  Thursday,  the  24th  of  September,  they  commenced  a 
Conference  at  Derby  Line,  Vt.,  which  continued  four  days. 
The  pain  in  Mr.  M.'s  shoulder  had  increased  considerably, 
and  resulted  in  a  tumor  of  considerable  size,  which  was  much 
inflamed.  Yet  he  preached  six  times,  with  a  good  degree  of 
vigor. 

On  Monday,  the  28th,  a  widowed  sister  of  Mr.  M.,  living 
in  Canada,  having  met  him  at  Derby  Line,  he  left  with  her 
for  her  residence  in  Hatley.  He  was  there  confined  about 
three  weeks  with  the  tumor  on  his  shoulder,  which  was  very 
painful,  affecting  his  neck  and  head,  and  discharged  freely 
for  many  days.  In  consequence  of  this  indisposition,  he  was 
unable  to  fulfil  several  appointments,  which  he  had  made  in 
that  region,  much  to  the  disappointment  of  the  inhabitants. 

As  soon  as  hp  was  able  to  ride,  they  started  for  Low 
Hampton ;  but  the  weather  and  roads  made  the  travelling 
very  tedious.  On  his  way  home  he  spent  a  Sabbath,  and 
preached  a  discourse  of  two  hours'  duration,  at  Bickford,  Vt., 
which  left  him  so  weak  that  it  was  with  difficulty  he  could 
walk.  On  arriving  at  Fairfield,  Vt.,  they  spent  a  night, 
and  Mr.  M.  preached  in  the  evening.  They  arrived  at  Low 
Hampton  after  an  absence  of  about  nine  weeks,  during  which 
he  had  been  treated  with  great  kindness  and  respect  wherever 
he  visited, —  with  the  exception  of  the  incident  at  Mont- 
gomery. 

"  My  tour  into  Canada,"  he  wrote  soon  after  his  return, 
"  would  have  been  pleasant  and  agreeable  to  me,  had  it  not 
been  for  sickness,  which  confined  me  to  the  house." 

On  the  27th  of  November  following,  he  wrote  to  Elder 
Buckley,  who  accompanied  him  on  the  above  journey : 

"  I  cannot  tell  you  what  I  have  done  since  you  were  here, 
but  I  can  tell  you  what  I  have  not  done. 

"1st.  I  have  not  done  with  vanity.  It  is  as  natural  as 
my  breath ;  and  if  I  ever  cease  from  vain  and  trifling  con- 


LETTER   TO    ELDER   BUCKLEY.  355 

versation  in  this  world,  you  must  place  me  in  society  which 
I  have  no  regard  for, —  either  to  love  or  to  hate. —  where  I 
could  be  a  hypocrite  without  any  drawback.  For  I  have 
often  noticed,  when  I  am  alone  and  with  no  one  to  converse 
with,  that  I  am  not  tempted  to  speak  words  of  vanity.  This 
is  the  reason  why  I  choose  to  be  alone  much  of  my  time.  In 
my  opinion,  this  accounts  for  the  ascetic  lives  of  the  early 
Christians.  What  think  you  —  is  it  not  best  for  me  to  be- 
come a  hermit  ? 

"  2d.  I  have  not  done  with  pain.  I  have  been  troubled 
with  head-ache,  teeth-ache,  bones-ache,  and  heart-ache,  since 
you  left ;  but  much  more  of  the  last  ache,  when  I  think 
of  so  many  of  my  once  dearly  beloved  brethren,  who  have, 
since  our  disappointment,  gone  into  fanaticism  of  every  kind, 
and  left  the  first  principles  of  the  glorious  appearing  of  the 
great  God  and  our  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ.  And  now,  can 
you  blame  me  for  desiring  a  hermitage,  away  from  these 
evil  tidings  and  shameful  acts  of  our  friends  in  this  time  of 
severe  trial  ] 

"  3d.  I  have  not  done  with  corruption.  My  swelling  dis- 
charges a  little  every  day,  and  I  see  myself  falling  to  corrup- 
tion daily.  It  may  be  that  I  am  corrupting  others  who  may 
be  brought  into  contact  with  me, —  for  instance,  the  fanatics. 
If  they  never  had  heard  of  '  Millerism,'  they  would  have  been 
sober,  worldly-seeking,  church-loving,  and  sectarian-build- 
ing men  and  women  to  this  day ;  and  they  would  have  been 
respected  as  much  as  other  church  members  are  by  the  rich 
and  popular  worldlings.  Yes,  yes  ;  so  says  the  world ;  and 
you  know  that  what  the  world  says  must  be  true.  This  is, 
in  these  modern  times,  the  best  evidence.  If,  then,  I  had 
been  a  recluse,  instead  of  running  at  large,  it  might  have 
saved  the  world  a  great  deal  of  trouble,  and  the  church  the 
knowledge  of  a  great  deal  of  corruption. 

"  4th.  I  have  done  no  good  thing.  I  can  prove  this  by 
every  writer,  Christian  and  political,  editors,  doctors  of  divin- 
ity, professors  and  ministers  of  all  denominations, —  from 
the  Roman  Catholic  to  the  Mormon, —  save  only  a  few  de- 
spised Adventists,  who,  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  are  as  much 
below  the  Mormons,  as  Christ  was  below  Barabbas  in  the 
Jews'  estimation. 

"'But,'  say  you,  'you  say  you  have  done  no  good 
31 


356  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

thing.  Was  it  not  a  good  thing  to  tell  us,  who  love  Christ's 
appearing,  that  he  was  near  to  come  1  Was  it  not  a  good 
thing  to  read  the  Bible  to  us,  and  show  by  history  its  fulfil- 
ment and  truth  ?  Was  it  not  a  good  thing  to  warn  sinners 
of  their  danger,  which  might  lead  them  to  repentance  and  a 
preparation  for  the  judgment  ?  Was  it  not  a  good  thing  to 
preach  the  kingdom  of  heaven  at  hand  and  the  judgment  ? 
Was  it  not  a  good  thing  to  preach  the  resurrection  of  these 
bodies,  the  inheritance  of  the  saints,  and  the  reign  of  Christ 
and  his  people  on  the  earth  made  new  forever  ?  Was  it  not 
a  good  thing  to  comfort  the  saints  with  the  words  of  his  com- 
ing, and  to  stir  them  up  to  a  remembrance  of  the  things 
which  Christ,  the  prophets,  and  apostles,  have  spoken  con- 
cerning his  coming  ?     And  have  not  you  done  all  this  1 ' 

"No,  no. 

"<  Who  has  then?' 

"  I  answer,  it  was  the  grace  of  God  which  worked  in  me 
of  his  own  good  pleasure  both  to  will  and  to  do. 

"  Since  I  have  been  preaching  this  hour,  I  will  give  you 
my  text,  2  Cor.  12  :  11,  last  clause  :  '  Though  I  be  noth- 
ing.'    And  now,  lastly,  the  improvement. 

"  1st.  You  may  learn,  by  my  subject,  that  I  am  nothing 
—  like  the  clay  in  the  hands  of  the  potter. 

"  2d.  You  may  learn,  if  any  good  has  been  done,  that 
God  has  done  it  by  his  grace ;  and  if  any  evil,  it  is  a  chastise- 
ment for  disobedience ;  for  '  shall  there  be  evil  in  a  city, 
and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  it  ?  ' —  Amos  3:6. 

"  3d.  We  may  learn,  by  the  effect  of  any  work,  whether 
it  be  of  God.  If  wicked  men,  and  proud,  selfish,  popular 
professors  join  hand  in  hand  to  oppose  you,  you  may  be  sure 
that  God  is  in  the  work. 

"  4th.  You  may  learn,  by  my  subject,  that  I  am  not  well 
of  my  disease.  Nor  do  I  expect  to  be  till  Christ  comes ;  for 
which  event  I  look  with  a  great  interest  and  desire. 

"  Yours,  Wm.  Miller." 

Having  desired  a  visit  from  Elder  Himes,  who  had  spent 
the  summer  in  Great  Britain,  and  having  received  intelligence 
that  such  a  visit  would  have  to  be  deferred  till  the  January 
following,  he  wrote  him,  on  the  7th  of  December,  1846,  after 
expressing  his  regrets  for  the  delay,  as  follows  : 


LETTER   TO    MR.    HIMES.  357 


a 


I  feel  lonesome  ;  yet  I  have  great  reason  to  bless  God, 
and  to  take  courage.  I  also  rejoice  that,  with  all  the  depar- 
tures from  the  faith  which  has  cheered  the  people  of  God  in 
every  age,  you,  and  those  connected  with  you  in  conducting 
the  Advent  Herald,  have  remained  steadfast.  In  this,  I  have 
abundant  reason  to  thank  my  Heavenly  Father.  Amidst 
my  severe  disappointments  and  trials,  God  has  given  me  a 
few  faithful  companions  who  have  not  been  shaken  from  the 
truth,  nor  been  turned  unto  fables  and  new  theories  of  men, 
by  the  cunning  craftiness  of  those  who  lie  in  wait  to  deceive. 
Yes,  my  brother,  if  you  will  continue  to  hold  up  the  truth 
as  you  have  done  thus  far,  God  will  bless  you ;  and  when 
the  Master  comes,  be  it  sooner  or  later,  he  will  say  to  you, 
6  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant,  enter  thou  into  the 
joy  of  thy  Lord.' 

"  If  this  should  be  the  last  letter  you  receive  from  old 
Brother  Miller  (which  may  be  the  case),  remember  it  has 
been  his  earnest  desire,  and  the  last  wish  of  his  heart,  that 
you  might  be  preserved  from  imbibing  those  views  so  de- 
rogatory to  the  Word  of  God; — the  return  of  the  carnal 
Jew, — a  millennium  before  the  coming  of  Christ, — probation 
after  the  Advent, —  sinners  or  sin  and  death  dwelling  in  the 
new  earth,  — regeneration  for  resurrection, —  unconscious 
state  of  the  dead, —  annihilation  of  the  soul,  &c.  All  these 
views,  with  many  others  of  a  like  character,  I  have  no  faith 
in,  nor  fellowship  for.  I  therefore  feel  that  it  is  my  duty, 
and  my  present  infirmities  admonish  me  that  it  is  one  of  my 
last,  to  affectionately,  yet  earnestly,  warn  my  dear  brethren 
against  these  dangerous  errors  and  practices.  Examine  the 
Word  of  God,  and  judge  of  their  fruits.  Follow  no  man,  or 
men,  unless  they  have  the  spirit  of  Christ,  which  is  not  a 
spirit  that  manifests  itself  in  a  love  of  self. 

"  My  health  is  very  poor.  I  never  expect  to  see  many 
of  my  dear  brethren  again  in  the  flesh  ;  and  perhaps,  before 
you  come,  I  may  be  with  Christ  in  spirit,  and  my  body 
under  the  cold  clods  of  the  valley.  I  have  often  wondered 
why  God  had  so  long  spared  me,  and  suffered  death  to  rob 
us  of  so  many  more  useful  than  myself. 

"  William  Miller." 

With  the  exception  of  an  occasional  article  for  the  press, 


358  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

Mr.  Miller  made  no  public  effort  during  the  winter.  His 
health  would  not  permit.  As  the  time  approached  for  the 
usual  Annual  Meeting  in  New  York  city  in  May,  1847,  he 
made  arrangements  to  be  present;  but  his  health  was  not 
sufficient.  In  writing  of  his  inability  to  be  present,  under 
date  of  May  6th,  1847,  he  said: 

M  I  cannot  charge  myself  with  any  corrupt  motive  in  pro- 
moting the  Second  Advent  doctrine.  If  I  have  any  regret, 
it  is  because  I  have  done  so  little,  and  because  I  have  been 
so  inefficient.  I  have  lacked  in  zeal  more  than  I  have 
lacked  in  faith.  I  believed,  and  do  still,  in  this  glorious  and 
Bible  doctrine  of  the  second  coming  of  our  dear  Redeemer, 
and  of  his  everlasting  kingdom  or  reign  in  paradise  restored. 

"  I  fear  that  I  shall  not  be  able  to  attend  at  Boston." 

His  health  was,  however,  so  much  improved,  that,  with 
Elder  Buckley,  his  companion  in  travel  of  the  previous  year, 
he  left  home  on  the  20th  of  May,  and  arrived  in  Boston  on 
the  22d,  three  days  before  the  Conference  commenced. 

The  day  following  was  Sunday,  and  he  preached  two 
discourses,  in-  the  afternoon  and  evening,  at  the  Saloon, 
at  No.  9  Milk  street,  where  the  Adventists  then  worshipped. 
On  Monday  evening  he  preached,  in  the  same  place,  on  the 
resurrection  of  the  body.  He  took  part  in  the  discussions 
of  the  Conference  during  the  week,  preached  once  on  the 
following  Sabbath,  and  on  Monday  left  for  home,  where  he 
arrived  on  Tuesday,  June  1st.  This  was  his  last  visit  to 
Massachusetts. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

DREAM LOSS  OF  SIGHT  EVENTS  IN  EUROPE  HEALTH  DE- 
CLINES —  EXPRESSION  OF  SYMPATHY  BY  THE  NEW  YORK  CON- 
FERENCE  HIS     REPLY LETTERS     OF     ELDERS     KIMBALL     AND 

ROBINSON. 

On  the  15th  of  September,  1847,  he  was  present  at  a 
tent-meeting  at  Basin  Harbor,  in  Ferrisburg,  Vt.,  which 
continued  four  days.  In  a  letter  written  on  the  27th  of  the 
same  month,  he  makes  the  following  reference  to  it : 


LETTER  TO   MR.    HIMES.  359 

"Dear  Brother  Himes: — I  cannot  refrain  from 
writing  a  few  words  to  you,  to  let  you  know  how  my  soul 
and  body  prosper  since  our  tent-meeting  at  Basin  Harbor. 

"  That  was  to  me  a  profitable  time.  It  seemed  like 
former  times,  when  the  truth  cut  to  the  heart  all  who  heard. 
The  preaching  was  plain,  powerful,  and  convincing.  The 
prayer-meetings  were  humble,  devotional,  and  penitent,  and 
very  properly  conducted.  No  uproar,  confusion,  or  fanati- 
cism, which  disturb  the  mind,  and  leave  a  bad  savor  upon 
the  hearts  of  the  fastidious.  The  conferences  were  perfect 
love-feasts,  and  the  songs  such  as  the  poet  describes : 

«  My  willing  soul  would  stay- 
in  such  a  frame  as  this  ; 
And  sit  and  sing  herself  away 
To  everlasting  bliss.' 

I  never  expect  to  enjoy  another  such  a  feast  of  tabernacles 
in  the  flesh.     God  was  with  us.     Praise  his  holy  name. 

"  You  have  a  real  helper  in  Brother  Hutchinson.  I  am 
thankful  to  God  for  you,  Brother  Himes,  for  you  need  just 
such  a  companion.  God  bless  you  both,  and  prosper  you  in 
your  work  of  preaching  the  kingdom  of  heaven  at  hand, 
which  is  the  everlasting  gospel,  and  the  best  news  ever 
heard  by  man. 

"  This  gospel  I  am  not  ashamed  of,  although  it  is  the 
cross-bearing  gospel  of  the  present  day.  I  was  edified, 
instructed,  and  encouraged.  Yes,  I  am  more  than  all  that ; 
I  am  strengthened  to  await  God's  appointed  time  with 
patience  and  hope,  knowing  shortly,  if  we  faint  not,  we 
shall  receive  an  abundant  admittance  into  the  kingdom  of 
God 

"There  are  some  things,  which  I  call  non-essential,  that 
are  gravely  discussed  by  some  among  us,  as  though  life  and 
death  depended  on  them,  and  are  by  many  made  test  ques- 
tions of  fellowship,  termed  '  the  questions  of  the  age,J  &c. 
I  mean  by  '  non-essential  things ?  those  questions  which 
have  no  practical  bearing  on  our  present  life.  For  instance, 
suppose  one  good  brother  is  pleased  to  believe  that  the  saints, 
after  the  resurrection,  will  have  two  wings,  another  four, 
and  a  third  that  they  will  have  six,  while  the  fourth  argues 
for  none  at  all.  If  this  was  continually  debated,  how  long 
before  there  would  be  four  parties,  especially  if  one  began  to 
31* 


360  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM  MILLER. 

boast  over  the  other.  This,  every  man  in  his  right  mind 
would  say,  was  of  no  consequence  to  us  in  this  life, —  whether 
they  had  two,  four,  or  six  wings,  or  none  at  all.  So  to  me 
is  the  question  of  the  annihilation  of  the  wicked ;  it  has  no 
manner  of  use  to  me  in  this  life.  And  I,  for  one,  am  deter- 
mined, God  being  my  helper,  not  to  belong  to  that  class  in 
the  world  to  come. 

"I  do  not  wonder  that  the  world  calls  us  insane;  for  I 
must  confess  it  looks  like  insanity  to  me,  to  see  religious, 
candid  men,  spend  their  time  and  talents  on  questions  of  so 
little  consequence  to  us  here  or  hereafter." 

Because  of  his  position  in  opposition  to  certain  theories,  the 
advocates  of  them,  who  wished  to  sustain  them  by  his  influ- 
ence, towards  the  close  of  his  life  represented  that  he  was 
controlled  in  his  opinions  by  Mr.  Himes.  In  a  published 
letter  to  him,  dated  October  26th,  1847,  he  says : 

"It  has  been  charged,  by  some,  that  I  have  been  influ- 
enced in  my  course  by  you  and  others.  Such  is  not  the 
case.  I  would  say  to  all,  that  I  have  never  been  dictated 
to  by  Bro.  Himes ;  nor  has  he,  to  my  knowledge,  ever  tried 
to  direct  me.  But  these  things  do  not  affect  me.  I  am  able 
to  bear  all  that  my  enemies  can  heap  upon  me,  if  the  Lord 
helps  me." 

As  his  infirmities  increased  and  strength  diminished,  he 
was  very  much  pained  by  the  irregularities,  extravagances, 
and  strange  notions  practised  or  entertained  by  those  who  had 
departed  from  his  teachings  and  counsels.  That  subject  so 
much  occupied  his  waking  thoughts,  that  it  was  not  singular 
if  his  sleeping  hours  were  affected  by  the  same. 

He,  no  more  than  others,  placed  any  reliance  on  dreams  ; 
yet  the  comfort  he  derived  from  one,  about  the  middle  of 
November,  caused  him  afterwards  to  write  it  out  for  publica- 
tion. In  a  letter,  written  three  weeks  subsequently,  he  thus 
relates  it : 

"Dear  Bro.  Himes :  — I  am  yet  in  the  land  of  the 
living,  and  under  the  trials  of  this  inconstant  world.  I  am 
confident  that  I  cannot  bear  the  trials,  perplexities,  and 
evils,  to  which  we  are  all  subject,  more  or  less,  as  I  once 
could ;  whether  it  is  owing  to  my  age,  infirmities,  or  for  the 


A   DREAM.  361 

want  of  my  former  activity,  I  cannot  tell ;  perhaps  all  these 
things  may  operate  on  my  mind  as  causes  to  produce  impa- 
tience, uneasiness,  and  the  like ;  to  avoid  which,  and  to  retain 
and  possess  an  equilibrium  of  temper,  I  have  had  to  use  all 
the  powers  of  my  body  and  mind.  I  have  often  found  it  a 
hard  contest  on  my  part  to  overcome  these  evils,  or  bear  up 
under  them,  with  the  fortitude  and  courage  of  a  soldier  of 
the  cross.  I  find  more  need  of  grace  as  I  progress  in  my 
journey  towards  the  saints'  inheritance. 

"  About  three  weeks  since,  owing,  as  I  suppose,  to  a  dis- 
covery, which  I  thought  I  had  made,  that  some  brethren, 
whom  I  had  loved  in  the  gospel  with  a  deep  and  intense 
interest,  had  become  alienated  from  me,  as  well  as  from  each 
other,  and  were  trying  to  supplant  and  injure  the  characters, 
usefulness,  influence,  and  abilities  of  other  brethren  and 
myself,  and  had  become  like  the  obscene  fowls  of  the  air  who 
live  only  on  carcasses  and  putrid  flesh  ;  it  seemed  to  me  that 
I  should  be  obliged  to  give  up  all  confidence  in  men,  and  all 
love  for  them ;  so  that,  like  David,  I  had  no  Jonathan  left, 
and  like  him  could  say,  '  I  shall  fall  one  day  by  the  hand 
of  Saul.'  While  in  this  deplorable  state  of  mind,  when  I 
was  about  to  believe  in  the  total  depravity  of  all  men,  and 
that  all  profession  of  religion  was  nothing  but  hypocrisy,  I 
received  comfort  and  consolation  from  the  following,  which 
may  pass  for 

UA   DREAM. 

'•  I  dreamed  that  God,  by  an  unseen  hand,  sent  me  a  curi- 
ously wrought  casket,  about  ten  inches  long  by  six  square, 
made  of  ebony  and  pearls  curiously  inlaid.  To  the  casket 
there  was  a  key  attached.  I  immediately  took  the  key  and 
opened  the  casket,  when,  to  my  wonder  and  surprise,  I  found 
it  filled  with  all  sorts  and  sizes  of  jewels,  diamonds,  precious 
stones,  and  gold  and  silver  coin  of  every  dimension  and  value, 
beautifully  arranged  in  their  several  places  in  the  casket  ; 
and  thus  arranged,  they  reflected  a  light  and  glory  equalled 
only  by  the  sun. 

"  I  thought  it  was  my  duty  not  to  enjoy  this  wonderful 
sight  alone",  although  my  heart  was  overjoyed  at  the  bril- 
liancy, beauty,  and  value  of  its  contents.  I  therefore  placed 
it  on  a  centre-table  in  my  room,  and  gave  out  word  that  all 


362  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

who  had  a  desire  might  come  and  see  the  most  glorious  and 
brilliant  sight  ever  seen  by  man  in  this  life. 

"The  people  began  to  come  in,  at  first  few  in  number, 
but  increasing  to  a  crowd.  When  they  first  looked  into  the 
casket  they  would  wonder  and  shout  for  joy.  But  when  the 
spectators  increased  every  one  would  begin  to  trouble  the 
jewels,  taking  them  out  of  the  casket  and  scattering  them 
on  the  table, 

"I  began  to  think  the  owner  would  require  the  casket 
and  jewels  again  at  my  hand ;  and  if  I  suffered  them  to  be 
scattered,  I  could  never  place  them  in  their  places  in  the 
casket  again  as  before  ;  and  felt  I  should  never  be  able  to 
meet  the  accountability,  for  it  would  be  immense.  I  then 
began  to  plead  with  the  people  not  to  handle  them,  nor  take 
them  out  of  the  casket ;  but  the  more  I  plead,  the  more 
they  scattered ;  —  and  now  they  seemed  to  scatter  them  all 
over  the  room,  on  the  floor,  and  on  every  piece  of  furniture 
in  the  room. 

"  I  then  saw  that  among  the  genuine  jewels  and  coin  they 
had  scattered  an  innumerable  quantity  of  spurious  jewels 
and  counterfeit  coin.  I  was  highly  incensed  at  their  base 
conduct  and  ingratitude,  and  reproved  and  reproached  them 
for  it ;  but  the  more  I  reproved  the  more  they  scattered  the 
spurious  jewels  and  false  coin  among  the  genuine. 

"  I  then  became  vexed  in  my  very  soul,  and  began  to 
use  physical  force  to  push  them  out  of  the  room;  but 
while  I  was  pushing  out  one,  three  more  would  enter, 
and  bring  in  dirt,  and  shavings,  and  sand,  and  all  manner 
of  rubbish,  until  they  covered  every  one  of  the  true  jewels, 
diamonds,  and  coins,  which  were  all  excluded  from  sight. 
They  also  tore  in  pieces  my  casket,  and  scattered  it  among 
the  rubbish.  I  thought  no  man  regarded  my  sorrow  or  my 
anger.  I  became  wholly  discouraged  and  disheartened,  and 
sat  down  and  wept. 

"  While  I  was  thus  weeping  and  mourning  for  my  great 
loss  and  accountability,  I  remembered  God,  and  earnestly 
prayed  that  he  would  send  me  help. 

"  Immediately  the  door  opened,  and  a  man  entered  the 
room,  when  the  people  all  left  it ;  and  he,  having  a  dirt- 
brush  in  his  hand,  opened  the  windows,  and  began  to  brush 
the  dust  and  rubbish  from  the  room. 


A   DREAM.  363 

"I  cried  to  him  to  forbear,  for  there  were  some  precious 
jewels  scattered  among  the  rubbish. 

"  He  told  me  to  'fear  not/  for  he  would  '  take  care  of 
them.' 

"  Then,  while  he  brushed,  the  dust  and  rubbish,  false 
jewels  and  counterfeit  coin,  all  rose  and  went  out  of  the 
windows  like  a  cloud,  and  the  wind  carried  them  away.  In 
the  bustle  I  closed  my  eyes  for  a  moment ;  when  I  opened 
them,  the  rubbish  was  all  gone.  The  precious  jewels,  the 
diamonds,  the  gold  and  silver  coins,  lay  scattered  in  profusion 
all  over  the  room. 

u  He  then  placed  on  the  table  a  casket,  much  larger  and 
more  beautiful  than  the  former,  and  gathered  up  the  jewels, 
the  diamonds,  the  coins,  by  the  handful,  and  cast  them  into 
the  casket,  till  not  one  was  left, —  although  some  of  the 
diamonds  were  not  bigger  than  the  point  of  a  pin. 

"  He  then  called  upon  me  to  '  come  and  see.' 

"  I  looked  into  the  casket,  but  my  eyes  were  dazzled  with 
the  sight.  They  shone  with  ten  times  their  former  glory. 
I  thought  they  had  been  scoured  in  the  sand  by  the  feet  of 
those  wicked  persons  who  had  scattered  and  trod  them  in 
the  dust.  They  were  arranged  in  beautiful  order  in  the 
casket,  every  one  in  its  place,  without  any  visible  pains  of 
the  man  who  cast  them  in.  I  shouted  with  very  joy,  and 
that  shout  awoke  me. 

"  The  effect  of  this  on  my  mind  has  been  extremely  con- 
soling and  happy.  Write  to  me  the  interpretation,  and 
receive  my  love  for  you  and  yours. 

"Wm.  Miller. 

"Low  Hampton,  December  3,  1847." 

On  the  publication  of  the  above,  it  was  generally  regarded 
as  a  dream  of  his  waking  hours;  but  he  subsequently 
assured  his  biographer  that  it  was  what  it  purported  to  be 
—  a  dream.  He  received  many  letters,  inquiring  if  it  was 
actually  a  dream ;  but  his  usual  reply  was,  "  I  so  stated  it ; 
did  you  doubt  my  veracity  ?  " 

In  response  to  his  request,  "  Write  me  the  interpreta- 
tion," many  attempted  to  solve  the  enigma,  to  explain 
which  no  Daniel  was  needed.  Without  professing  any  skill 
in  the  "  interpreting  of  dreams,"  the  "showing  hard  sen- 


864  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

tences  and  dissolving  doubts,"  Mr.  M.  acquiesced  in  the 
following  interpretation. 

"  The  'casket'  was  the  volume  of  God's  truth, — his 
whole  revealed  Word. 

"  The  'jewels,  diamonds,  precious  stones,'  &c,  were  the 
doctrines  of  the  Bible,  which,  each  sparkling  and  bright 
like  precious  gems,  glittered  in  the  casket  as  they  were 
unfolded  to  view. 

"  The  scattering  of  these  gems  was  the  sad  havoc  which 
the  unstable,  and  those  turned  about  by  every  wind  of  doc- 
trine, made  with  certain  portions  of  revealed  truth  ;  preach- 
ing for  doctrines  the  imaginings  of  their  own  hearts,  and 
placing  precious  doctrines  of  God's  grace  and  providence 
among  the  rubbish,  dirt,  shavings,  and  sand,  of  the  great 
apostasy  ;  wresting  them  to  their  own  destruction. 

"  While  Mr.  Miller  expostulated  with  one  class  of  these 
errorists,  three  more  would  arise  in  other  places,  until  it 
was  difficult  to  convince  the  people  who  '  we  were.'  ^ 

"The  restoration  of  the  jewels  to  their  place  was  the 
ushering  in  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  when  each  diamond 
truth  will  be  separated  from  the  dust  and  mist  with  which 
the  ignorance,  unbelief,  or  depravity  of  man  has  encumbered 
it,  to  shine  in  the  Saviour's  diadem." 

Among  the  interpretations  communicated  to  him,  though 
not  expressing  his  own  views,  the  two  following  are  deemed 
worthy  of  preservation  for  their  poetic  merit. 

"TO    MR.  WILLI  AM    MILLER. 

"  THOUGHTS  SUGGESTED  BY  HEADING  YOUR  LETTER  CONTAINING  THE  DREAM. 

"  Bright  was  the  gift  to  thy  hand  once  given, 
Sparkling  with  gems,  for  thy  crown  in  heaven  ; 
More  precious  the  jewels  glittering  there 
Than  Ethiop's  topaz,  or  sapphires  fair, 
Than  the  coral  branch,  or  pearls  most  fine, 
Or  the  golden  coin  from  fair  Ophir's  mine  : 
'T  were  souls  that  were  gathered,  and  washed  in  light, 
Streaming  from  heaven,  transcendently  bright. 
And  yet,  weary  pilgrim,  thy  gift's  pure  ray 
Seemed  dimmed,  even  lost,  in  the  rough,  dark  way  ; 
Its  beautiful  brilliance  was  hid  in  dust, 
Its  gold  seemed  cankered,  and  eaten  with  rust  ; 
Lost !  lost !  seemed  the  once  sparkling  diadem, 
And  scattered  and  trodden  each  costly  gem. 

*  See  p.  300. 


TO   FATHER  MILLER.  365 

Was  thy  heart  then  stricken,  poor  weary  one  ? 

Seemed  there  nothing  to  light  thee, —  no  star,  no  sun,  — 

To  find  the  rich  gift  that  thy  God  had  given, 

As  a  token  to  thee  of  thy  peace  with  heaven  ? 

Ah  yes  !  at  that  moment  of  anguish  most  deep, 

Israel's  God  did  not  slumber  nor  sleep  : 

He  knows  of  each  tear,  and  lists  to  each  sigh  ; 

Angels  are  sent  from  their  bright  home  on  high, 

To  guard  and  to  keep  thee  in  all  thy  ways, 

And  to  pour  on  thy  soul  the  heaven-lit  rays. 

"  Thy  jewels  are  gathered, —  the  false  ones  are  flown  ; 
The  chaff  and  the  dust  to  the  winds  are  strewn, 
Thy  casket  is  glowing  with  rubies  most  rare, 
The  pearls  are  the  purest,  the  diamonds  fair  : 
O  !  bright  is  the  light  of  each  shining  gem 
That  burns  in  that  glorious  diadem. 
On  !  on  !  brave  old  pilgrim,  thy  task  soon  is  done, — 
Thy  struggles  soon  ended,  thy  victory  won." 

Mrs.  L.  H.  Smith 

"  TO    FATHER    MILLER. 

"  Aged  saint,  why  weepest  thou  ? 
Christ  is  at  the  fountain  still, 
Whence  the  healing  streams  do  flow, 
Powerful  yet  to  pardon  ill ; 

"  Every  jewel  in  his  crown, 

Washed  and  purified  from  stain, 
Brighter  far  than  diamonds  found, 
Polished  by  the  art  of  man. 

"  Beauteous  settings  !  not  one  lost, 
Every  tribe  and  nation  here, 
Through  the  anguish  of  the  cross, 
Rich  in  glory  shall  appear. 

"  Now,  amidst  the  mines  of  earth, 

Lost  in  darkness,  sin,  despair, 
Where  's  the  glory  of  their  birth  ? 
Where  's  the  holy  and  the  fair  ? 

"  When,  upon  thy  ravished  sight, 
God's  own  city  rose  to  view, 
With  its  gates  and  pillars  bright, 
Sea  of  glass,  and  glory  too  — 

"  Quick  to  wondering  sinners  thou 

Gladly  saidst,  '  The  Lord  is  nigh  ;  ' 
Aged  servant,  rest  thee  now, 
For  thy  record  is  on  high. 

"  If,  about  thy  pathway  strewed, 
Dust  and  gems  promiscuous  lie, 
Saint,  look  up,  thy  Lord  doth  know 
Every  gem  thy  sight  would  spy. 


366  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

And  when  Jesus  comes  to  winnow 

Wheat  from  chaff, —  the  saint  from  sinner,    ■ 

All  thy  jewels  will  be  there, 

In  his  diadem  most  fair  ; 

Not  a  saint  will  then  be  lost, 

Purchased  by  the  Saviour's  cross. 

Joyful,  then,  wilt  thou  behold 

Casket  fair,  and  burnished  gold, 

Precious  stones  and  coins  most  rare  ;  — 

All,  all,  all  will  then  be  there  ! 

Hold  thee  on  a  little  space, 

For  thy  Master,  face  to  face, 

Will  sweetly  say,  "  Come,  dwell  with  me, 

From  the  dust  of  death  set  free." 

Every  pain  that  now  afflicts  thee, 

Every  ill  that  now  besets  thee, 

All  will  vanish  in  the  light 

Of  thy  casket  second  sight." 

Mrs.  C.  A.  Ludlow. 

Towards  the  last  of  January,  1848,  Mr.  Miller  was 
attacked  with  a  dimness  of  sight,  which  deprived  him.  of  his 
usual  privilege  of  reading  and  writing,  which,  through  life, 
had  been  to  him  a  source  of  great  enjoyment.  His  health, 
otherwise,  continued  as  good  as  could  be  expected,  in  his 
gradually  declining  age. 

With  the  loss  of  his  sight,  he  had  to  depend  on  others  to 
read  to  him,  and  to  write  the  letters  which  he  dictated.  He 
desired  the  continuance  of  letters  from  his  correspondents, 
but  requested  them  to  excuse  him  from  replying. 

The  hope  of  soon  meeting  them  where  the  lame  man 
shall  leap  as  an  hart,  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  sing,  the  blind 
receive  their  sight,  and  the  deaf  hear,  and  the  belief  in  the 
nearness  of  that  day,  was  a  great  consolation  to  him  under 
his  accumulating  infirmities.  His  loss  of  sight  was  com- 
municated by  his  son,  Wm.  S.  Miller,  Esq.,  in  a  letter  dated 
February  10th,  about  two  weeks  after  his  attack. 

On  the  7th  of  March,  a  letter,  from  a  daughter-in-law  of 
Mr.  Miller,  stated  that  his  general  health  was  then  better, 
but  that  he  had  been  unable  to  read  a  word  for  seven  weeks 
anterior  to  the  preceding  Sabbath.  On  that  day,  his  son 
Robbins  took  the  glass  from  the  spy-glass,  and  held  it  to  his 
eye,  so  that  he  read  a  few  words.     She  added  :  — 

"  His  eyes  are  not  sore  :  the  physician  whom  he  has  con- 
sulted says  the  retina  is  affected.  Father  bears  his  affliction 
well.     I  have  never  heard  him  murmur,  nor  say  that  it  was 


FAILURE    OF   HIS   EYE-SIGHT.  367 

hard.     I  think  that  he  feels  somewhat  c  cast  down,  but  not 
forsaken.'  " 

Appended  to  the  above  letter,  Mr.  Miller  wrote,  without 
being  able  to  see  a  word  : 

"  God  bless  you,  bless  you  all,  and  save  you,  is  my  prayer. 

"Wm.  Miller." 

After  this  his  general  health  was  some  improved,  so  that 
he  was  able  to  be  about  and  to  busy  himself  with  light  work. 
He  was  able  to  distinguish  one  object  from  another,  and 
could  often  recognize  his  friends  and  acquaintances  ;  but, 
with  the  best  glasses  he  could  get,  he  could  not  so  distin- 
guish letters  as  to  read  words.  He  sometimes  attempted  to 
write  without  seeing  the  letters  that  he  traced.  In  an  un- 
finished letter  of  this  kind,  dated  April.  10,  1848,  he  says  : 

'*  The  stone  has  commenced  its  breaking  process,  and,  ere 
the  governments  held  by  the  ten  kings  shall  be  totally  over- 
thrown, the  kingdom  of  God  will  come.  The  accounts  from 
Europe  prove  to  my  mind  that  the  work  is  now  begun,  and 
the  saints  may  lift  their  heads  and  look  up ;  for  their  re- 
demption draweth  nigh.  Be  of  good  cheer.  Be  not  faith- 
less, but  believing.  We  shall  soon  see  Him  for  whom  we 
have  looked  with  such  anxiety,  and  waited  for  writh  patience. 
I  believe  and  rejoice." 

On  the  14th  of  September,  1848,  he  wrote  to  Mr. 
Himes : 

"  Permit  me  to  write  a  tew  words,  although  you  may  not 
be  able  to  read  them.  Yet  it  may  fill  up  a  lonesome  hour 
or  two  of  many  a  wearisome  day  to  think  I  have  indited 
some  of  my  thoughts  to  my  old  brother  traveller.  It  would, 
indeed,  be  a  sad  and  melancholy  time  with  me  wTere  it  not 
for  the  '  blessed  hope  '  of  soon  seeing  Jesus.  In  this  I 
flatter  myself  that  I  cannot  be  mistaken.  And  although 
my  natural  vision  is  dark,  yet  my  mind's  vision  is  lit  up 

with  a  bright  and  glorious  prospect  of  the  future 

"Wm.  Miller." 

Among  his  papers  he  left  an  unfinished  letter,  dated  Jan. 
1,  1849,  as  follows  : 
32 


368  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

"  Dear  Bro.  Himes  :  —  I  wish  you  a  happy  new  year. 
And  I  hope  it  may  bring  to  you  a  happy  eternity  ;  or,  at 
least,  as  much  more  evidence  of  its  near  approach  as  the 
past  year  has  given.  Take  courage,  brother  soldier;  the 
battle  is  almost  won.  We  shall  not  long  be  disappointed. 
God  began  this  work,  this  strange  work  ;  and,  in  a  short 
time,  he  will  accomplish  his  purpose  in  the  earth.  Sheshach 
is  now  drinking  the  cup  of  his  fury." 

The  form  of  the  letters  and  direction  of  the  lines  in  the 
above  writing  gave  too  plain  an  indication  that  the  pen  was 
not  guided  by  the  eye. 

Mr.  Miller  had  watched  the  European  events  of  the  year 
1848  with  a  good  deal  of  interest,  as  one  revolution  suc- 
ceeded another.  The  following  letter,  written  while  the 
Pope  was  in  exile,  and  before  the  reaction  in  the  several 
governments  was  developed,  gives  the  view  which  he  then 
took  of  those  events : 

"  Low  Hampton,  February  13,  1849. 

"  Brother  Himes  :  —  Permit  me  to  drop  you  a  few 
thoughts  on  the  historical  facts  of  the  last  year,  compared 
with  the  prophecies  in  the  word  of  God.  The  little  horn  of 
the  7th  and  8th  chapters  of  Daniel,  the  man  of  sin  of  the  2d 
chapter  of  2d  Thessalonians,  the  latter  part  of  the  beast  and 
the  image-beast  of  the  13th  chapter  of  Revelation,  are  evi- 
dently prophecies  concerning  the  Popes  of  Rome.  The  rea- 
sons which  are  conclusive  to  me  are,  1st.  These  characters 
are  represented  as  having  great  power,  blood-thirsty,  cruel, 
and  blasphemous,  making  war  against  the  saints,  and  prosper- 
ing until  the  Ancient  of  Days  shall  come,  or  until  the  end 
of  the  indignation,  or  the  appearing  of  the  Son  of  Man.  The 
time  of  his  rule,  when  given,  is  the  same ;  the  consumption 
and  destruction  at  his  end  is  the  same ;  the  means  of  that 
destruction  are  represented  to  be,  not  by  the  power  of  men, 
but  of  God.  Daniel  represents  that  his  dominion  shall  be 
taken  away,  and  his  body  reserved  to  the  burning  flame. 
He  also  represents  that  he  shall  be  broken  without  hand, 
and  destroyed  in  the  indignation  of  God's  wrath.  Paul 
represents  that  he  shall  be  consumed  by  the  spirit  of  God's 
mouth,  and  destroyed  by  the  brightness  of  his  coming.  John 
represents  his  consumption  as  being  by  the  sword  that  pro- 


LETTER   TO    MR.  IIIMES.  369 

ceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God,  with  which  he  smites  the 
nations,  and  casts  the  beast  alive  into  a  lake  of  fire  burning 
with  brimstone.  —  Rev.  19  :  15,  20.  Therefore,  the  char- 
acter, acts,  chronology,  consumption,  and  destruction  of  the 
little  horn,  the  man  of  sin,  and  the  beast,  in  these  three 
prophecies,  synchronize  to  a  charm.  Daniel  represents  him 
as  making  war  against  the  saints,  and  prevailing  until  the 
Ancient  of  Days  came,  and  judgment  was  given  to  the  saints 
of  the  Most  High,  and  they  possessed  the  kingdom.  The 
first  thing  Daniel  saw  previous  to  the  coming  of  the  Ancient 
of  Days  was,  that  the  thrones  were  cast  down. 

"  Now  for  the  historical  facts.  The  Popes  of  Rome  have 
declared  and  made  war,  as  predicted,  for  more  than  twelve 
centuries ;  so  that,  in  the  beginning  of  last  year,  he  had 
prospered,  and  established  dioceses  and  parishes  in  every 
land  and  continent  on  the  habitable  globe.  His  legates  and 
ministers  were  known  and  recognized  in  all  cabinets  of  the 
world.  His  subjects  are  scattered  into  every  land  in  Chris- 
tendom ;  acknowledged  to  be  the  supreme  head  of  the  church 
by  almost  every  kingdom  and  government  on  the  earth  ; 
lauded  and  extolled  by  the  citizens  of  Protestant  as  well  as 
Catholic  countries ;  he  was  called  the  Apostle  of  Liberty, 
the  Reformer  of  the  Age,  and  worshipped,  if  not  deified,  by 
congregated  citizens  in  many  of  our  cities  and  principal 
towns  :  no  emperor,  king,  or  potentate,  so  popular  as  Pius 
IX.  Thus  stood  matters  in  the  beginning  of  the  year  1848. 
In  one  short  year  many  of  the  Catholic  governments  of  Eu- 
rope have  been  revolutionized,  and  lost  a  part,  if  not  all,  the 
power  they  possessed  in  the  beginning  of  the  year.  Pope 
Pius  IX.  has  lost  his  supremacy  and  civil  power,  and  become 
.  a  refugee  from  his  own  government,  and  can  neither  make 
nor  declare  war.  How  was  he  deprived  of  his  secular  power 
and  his  dominion  taken  from  him  1  I  answer,  evidently  by 
the  providence  and  power  of  God,  as  predicted.  No  kingdom 
at  war  with  him,  no  ambitious  Bonaparte  to  dethrone  him, 
no  collected  armies  to  fight  him,  no  organized  force  to  oppose 
him.  In  one  hour,  as  it  were,  he  fell  by  his  own  arts,  per- 
haps through  fear  — -  of  what,  we  can  hardly  account  for. 

1 '  What  ailed  thee,  0  thou  potentate  of  kings  ?  Didst 
thou  discover  on  the  walls  of  the  Vatican  the  hand-writing 
of  Belshazzar,  '  Mene,  mene,  tekel ?  ?  or  did  a  few  plebeians 


370  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

of  Rome,  collected  as  a  mob  around  thy  palace-gate,  make 
the  infallible  head  of  the  church,  the  vicar  of  God.  truly 
afraid  ?  Where  was  thy  faith  in  the  great  promise,  that  the 
1  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it '  ?  or  was  it  the 
power  of  Him  who  had  declared  by  his  prophet  that  you 
should  be  broken  without  hand,  or  consumed  by  the  spirit 
of  his  mouth  J  Where  were  those  millions  who  considered 
thy  word  more  sacred  than  the  Word  of  God.  and  idolized 
thee  as  a  god  on  earth  ?  "Where  were  all  those  that,  a  few 
months  before,  were  shouting  paeans  to  thy  glory  I  Could 
not  the  adoration  of  the  world  calm  thy  fears  !  Had  thy 
popular  name  no  talisman,  and  thy  pride  no  helper  )  No. 
no.  It  was  the  God  of  heaven  that  smote  thee.  It  was  the 
spirit  of  the  Most  High  that  made  thee  afraid.  It  was  the 
word  of  Him  that  dwelt  in  the  bush  that  made  thee  cower. 
It  was  the  pen  of  the  prophet  that  told  thy  fate.  You  lied 
in  the  dark  watches  of  the  same  night,  disguised  as  a  livery- 
servant,  from  the  walls  of  that  palace  which  had  for  ages 
sent  out  mandates  for  kings  and  laws  for  the  world,  and 
became  a  refugee  in  a  neighboring  kingdom,  a  resident  in  a 
small  village  on  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean.  And  well 
do  your  friends  talk  of  purchasing  some  small  island  in  that 
sea  for  your  asylum,  or  a  small  farm-  on  its  borders  for  your 
cultivation!  But.  hark  ye  !  the  prophet's  pen  has  further 
described  your  fate.  Not  only  is  your  dominion  to  be  taken 
away,  but  your  body  is  to  be  given  to  the  burning  flame. 
You  are  not  only  to  be  broken  without  hand,  but  destroyed 
in  the  indignation,  consumed  by  the  spirit  of  his  mouth,  and 
destroyed  by  the  brightness  of  Christ's  coming. 

"We  live  in  a  moment  of  awful  consequences  to  the 
world,  at  a  point  when  the  fate  of  the  universe  will  be  de- 
cided forever.  Wm.  Miller/'' 

About  the  last  of  April.  1849.  his  health  began  to  decline 
more  rapidly.  This  being  communicated  by  Mr.  Miller's 
son  to  Mr.  Himes.  and  received  by  him  at  New  York  during 
the  session  of  the  Annual  Conference  there  on  the  10th  of 
May.  1849.  he  stated  to  the  Conference  the  intelligence,  and 
moved  that  they  convey  to  Mr.  M.  an  expression  of  sympa- 
thy.    The  following  resolution  was  immediately  drawn  up 


LETTER   TO    THE   ANNUAL    CONFERENCE.  371 

by  the  president,   and   unanimously  adopted    by  a   rising 
vote  : 

"  Advent  Conference,  New  York,  May  10,  1849. 

"  Whereas  our  beloved  Brother  William  Miller  has  been 
called  to  endure  a  great  fight  of  afflictions ;  and  as  God  has 
been  pleased,  after  employing  him  in  advancing  the  cause  of 
truth,  to  lay  his  hand  on  him,  and  suspend  his  labors ; 
therefore, 

"  Resolved,  That  we  deeply  sympathize  with  our  brother 
in  his  sorrows,  and  assure  him  that  our  love  to  him  is  stead- 
fast, and  that  he  has  our  earnest  prayers  that  '  these  light 
afflictions,  which  are  but  for  a  moment,  may  work  out  for 
him  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory;'  and 
that  ^Ye  hope,  ere  long,  we  may  meet  with  him  and  all  the 
saints  in  the  new  heavens  and  earth,  where  there  will  be  no 
more  sighing,  sorrow,  or  death. 

"  (Signed,)  Nathan  K  Whiting,  President. 

"  Sylvester  Bliss,  )  ~       .     .     „ 
c  r\   -d    -T7  }  secretaries. 

"  0.  R.  Fassett,       ) 

Mr.  Miller  received  the  above  on  the  12th  of  May,  by  the 
hand  of  his  biographer.  On  entering  his  room,  he  was  re- 
clining on  a  lounge.  At  the  mention  of  his  name,  he  imme- 
diately arose,  and  recognized  the  messenger.  He  was  much 
affected  with  the  expression  of  sympathy  sent  by  the  Con- 
ference, and  returned  the  following  reply,  which  was  received 
by  the  Conference  at  Boston,  to  which  place  it  had  adjourned, 
where  it  was  entered  on  its  minutes,  May  29th,  1849  : 

"Low  Hampton,  May  12th,  1849. 

"  To  my  beloved  brethren  in  Christ,  assembled  in  confer- 
ence, and  to  the  saints  scattered  abroad.  Grace  be  unto 
you,  and  peace,  from  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ : 

"  I  give  thanks  to  God  for  your  kind  remembrance  of  me, 
as  expressed  in  the  resolution  of  the  10th  of  May  inst.,  in 
your  late  meeting  at  New  York  city,  and  forwarded  to  me 
by  the  hand  of  Bro.  Bliss.  I  have  not  ceased  to  make  men- 
tion of  you  always  in  my  prayers,  that  you  might  w^alk  togeth- 
er worthy  of  your  high  calling  in  Christ  Jesus,  that  you 
may  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  his  will,  in  all  wisdom 
32* 


372  LIFE    OF   "WILLIAM   MILLER. 

and  spiritual  understanding,  being  fruitful  in  every  good 
work,  and  increasing  in  the  knowledge  of  God.  I  feel  my- 
self greatly  revived  by  your  expression  of  sympathy,  and 
trust  that  you  will  never  have  occasion  to  feel  that  it  has 
been  misplaced. 

■ '  My  multiplied  and  increasing  infirmities  admonish  me 
that  the  time  of  my  departure  is  drawing  nigh.  My  earthly 
labors  have  ceased,  and  I  now  await  the  Master's  call,  to  be 
ready  at  his  appearing,  or.  if  it  so  please  him.  for  the  little 
while  his  coming  may  be  delayed,  to  depart  and  be  with 
Christ,  which  is  far  better  than  to  abide  in  the  flesh.  I  feel 
that  I  have  but  little  choice,  whether  I  shall  be  continued 
in  life  till  that  event,  or  my  spirit  be  gathered  to  the  spirits 
of  just  men  made  perfect.  However  God  may  be  pleased  to 
deal  with  me.  I  am  sustained  by  the  blessed  assurance,  that; 
whether  I  wake  or  sleep.  I   shall  be  present  with  the  Lord. 

•*I  daily  have  you  all  in  grateful  remembrance:  and  re- 
joice that  so  many  of  you  continue  steadfast  in  the  faith 
once  delivered  to  the  saints,  looking  for  that  blessed  hope 
and  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God.  even  of  our 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  I  pray  God  that  your  faith  may  fail 
not.  and  that  you  may  continue  working  together  in  harmony, 
building  up  one  another  in  the  most  holy  faith,  and.  by  your 
blameless  lives  and  godly  conversation,  commending  this  gos- 
pel of  Christ  to  the  hearts  and  consciences  of  dying  men. 

•'•I  have  but  little  hope,  in  my  present  weakness  and  in- 
firmities, of  seeing  the  faces  of  many  of  you  in  the  flesh. 
Permit  me.  therefore,  to  exhort  you  not  to  be  ashamed  of 
the  doctrine  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  nor  of  acknowled^inc: 
on  all  proper  occasions  your  confidence  in  the  nearness  of  his 
coming. 

• '  My  belief  is  unshaken  in  the  correctness  of  the  conclu- 
sions I  have  arrived  at  and  maintained  during  the  last  twenty 
years.  I  see  no  reason  to  question  the  evidence  on  which 
rest  the  fundamental  principles  of  our  faith.  I  cannot  avoid 
the  belief  that  this  earth  is  to  be  restored  to  its  Eden  state, 
and  become  the  eternal  residence  of  the  saints :  that  Christ 
is  to  come  personally,  to  reign  on  the  earth ;  that  he  will 
redeem  us  from  death,  and  ransom  us  from  the  power  of  the 
grave :  that  he  will  change  our  vile  bodies  into  the  likeness 
of  his  glorified  body,  and  destroy  those  who  destroy  the 


LETTER   TO   THE   ANNUAL   CONFERENCE.  373 

earth  ;  and  that  at  his  coming  will  be  the  restoration  of  all 
things  spoken  of  by  the  mouth  of  all  the  holy  prophets  since 
the  world  began,  the  establishment  of  the  new  heavens  and 
new  earth,  the  resurrection  of  the  righteous,  and  the  change 
of  the  living  wicked  from  the  earth, —  whose  resurrection 
will  not  transpire  till  after  one  thousand  years. 

"  The  evidences  of  Christ's  coming  are  continually  thick- 
ening ;  it  hasteneth  greatly,  and  should  this  earthly  house  of 
my  tabernacle  be  dissolved,  my  hope  is  still  strong  that  I 
shall  shortly  meet  him  in  the  air.  The  political  clouds  in 
the  Eastern  horizon  indicate  to  me  the  near  approach  of  the 
battle  of  the  Lord  God  Almighty,  the  destruction  of  the  king- 
doms of  the  earth,  and  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom  of 
God.  We  may  not  know  the  precise  time,  but  I  entreat  of 
you  all  to  be  prepared  for  the  approaching  crisis. 

"  Grudge  not  one  against  another,  brethren.  Be  patient, 
for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh.  Be  not  many 
masters,  but  let  each  one  do  the  work  which  God  has  fitted 
him  for.  Avoid  vain  janglings  and  questions  which  gender 
strife.  Keep  constantly  in  view  the  great  question  of  the 
coming  of  the  Lord, —  the  hope  of  which  purifieth  the  heart, 
and  tends  to  the  unity  of  the  whole  body  of  believers.  If 
you  do  this,  you  will  do  well,  and  will  each  seek  the  other's 
good  in  preference  to  his  own,  and  thus  become  living  epis- 
tles, known  and  read  of  all  men. 

"  In  unity  of  effort  will  be  your  only  strength.  There- 
fore I  recommend  your  meeting  often  in  conference,  as  you 
have  done,  to  consult  with  and  encourage  each  other,  in  these 
times  of  trial  and  temptation.  Be  not  turned  away  from 
your  great  work  by  friends  or  foes  ;  but  let  each  one  occupy 
the  talent  intrusted  to  him  —  each  working  in  his  appro- 
priate field  of  labor.  Be  charitable  to  all,  and  not  indulge 
in  harsh  and  bitter  denunciations  against  those  who  are  not 
enabled  to  see  with  you.  Cultivate  that  spirit  of  good  will 
towards  all  men,  which  shall  fit  you  to  be  instrumental,  in 
the  hands  of  God,  of  saving  some ;  and  be  less  interested  to 
advance  the  prosperity  of  party  or  sect,  than  to  extend  the 
cause  of  truth.  Above  all,  keep  close  to  the  word  of  God. 
And,  finally,  brethren,  farewell.  Be  perfect,  be  of  good 
cheer,  be  of  one  mind,  live  in  peace ;  and  the  God  of  love 
and  peace  shall  be  with  you.  Wm.  Miller." 


374  LIFE    OP    WILLIAM   MILLER. 

He  was  at  this  time  somewhat  disposed  to  melancholy,  but 
while  the  writer  was  with  him.  which  was  two  days,  he  par- 
took of  his  food  with  the  family,  and  ate  with  considerable 
relish. —  which  was.  they  stated,  what  he  had  not  done  before 
for  several  weeks.  He  never  doubted  his  acceptance  through 
the  blood  of  Jesus,  but  rather  shrank  from  the  expected  suf- 
ferings attending  the  dissolution  of  the  body.  Still  he  was 
willing  to  endure  all  that  for  the  sake  of  the  prospect  beyond. 
In  a  letter  written  at  this  date,  he  said  : 

••  If  the  meeting  with  one  kindred  spirit  is  so  cheering  to 
a  sick  man  here,  what  must  be  the  joy  of  our  greeting  in  the 
other  world  !  The  thought  of  death  is  a  chilling  one  :  but 
a  meeting  with  the  kindred  spirits  who  are  with  Christ  wait- 
ing for  the  consummation  of  his  kingdom  reconciles  me  to  the 
idea  of  passing  through  the  dark  valley." 

In  November.  1549.  Elder  L.  Kimball,  who  had  had  the 
charge  of  the  church  in  Low  Hampton,  took  his  leave  of 
that  people.     He  writes  : 

••  Agreeably  to  Bro.  Miller's  urgent  request,  we  held  the 
evening  meeting  [of  the  first  Sunday  in  HSfov.]  [ 
He  said  he  wanted  to  hear  me  v.-reaoh  on: 
desired  the  singers  to  attend.  After  assem 
me  to  his  room,  and  gave  me  for  a  text.  ■  Am: 
hod  seen  the  brethren,  they  comforted  them 
Acts  16  :  40.  He  was  drawn,  in  his  easy-chair,  from  his 
room  to  the  kitchen,  where  he  remained  till  the  close  of  the 
services.  He  was  unable  to  take  any  part,  but  expressed 
himself  gratified,  and  wished  that  he  could  have  said  a  few 
Is  to  the  brethren  and  friends  present.     It  was  to  me  a 

About  the  1st  of  December;  Elder  D.  I.  Robinson  visited 
him.      He  writes  : 

••  Such  was  the  state  of  the  roads  that  I  did  not  arrive 
there  till  sunset.     His  house  stood  in  s:_h:  o:  fo. :  s:r  _   - 
to  Rutland,  so  that  it  was  a  subject  for   :>bservati<: 
the  passengers  in  the  stage.     It  was  pointed  out  to  m 
one  of  them,  who  lived  in  an  adfoining  village.      It  was  to 
me  a  fruitful  subject,  as  I  beheld,  for  foe   first  time, 
beauty   and    sublimity   in   the    cul:iva:o  1   v.-fo    ami    sr 
capped,  venerable   mountains  in   the    vicinity.      I   thought 
how  appropriate. —  how  like  the  kills  and    afo:-.-    ; 


:s  :o 

rase. 

He 

also 

be  e 

ailed 

they 

LETTER  OF  ELDER  ROBINSON.         875 

vrliere  Amos  and  other  shepherds,  and  former  servants  of 
the  Most  High  lived,  were  called,  and  sent  to  warn  man- 
kind ! 

"As  I  approached  across  the  farm,  I  passed  the  grove 
where  he  had  meditated,  wept  and  prayed,  and  entered  the 
house  of  the  aged,  worn-out,  sick  and  dying  servant  of  God, 
who  had  been  so  scorned  by  the  world.  I  felt  favored  of 
God.  I  was  welcomed  in  the  simple,  hearty,  easy  style  of 
a  Vermont  Christian  farmer's  family.  That  pleasant, 
beaming  countenance  of  his  wife,  and  the  hearty  shake  of 
the  hand,  told  me  I  was  at  home ;  and  the  kettle  of  hom- 
ony,  just  taken  from  the  fire,  was  at  once  prophetic  of 
my  supper.  And  all  the  members  of  the  family,  intelli- 
gent, modest  and  cordial,  made  me  feel  how  really  glad 
they  were  of  the  call,  and  to  hear  from  those  abroad. 

"I  was  quickly  invited  into  the  'east  room,'  where 
1  Father  Miller '  greeted  me,  though  he  could  not  see  so  as 
to  know  me  ;  but,  when  told,  recollected  distinctly.  He 
was  much  changed,  and  yet  so  changed  as  to  leave  all  the 
good  outlines  of  former  acquaintance  behind.  His  suffer- 
ings, through  the  summer,  and  fall,  had  been  very  great. 
He  was  much  swollen  by  dropsy.  His  strength  and  sight 
were  much  diminished.  His  venerable  white  locks  were 
few  and  thin,  and  his  flesh  was  like  that  of  a  child.  But 
his  voice  was  full,  his  memory  good,  his  intellect  strikingly 
strong  and  clear,  and  his  patience  and  resignation  were 
remarkable.  He  asked  of  my  welfare,  and  of  the  friends ; 
and  said  he  was  never  so  strong  in  his  mind  that  we  were 
right  as  now.  He  was  sure  it  could  not  be  long  before  the 
coming  of  the  Lord.  He  wished  him  to  come  soon ;  but,  if 
not,  to  be  taken  himself  to  the-  Lord." 

He  was  drawn  to  the  table  in  his  chair,  and  ate  supper 
with  the  family,  probably  for  the  last  time.  Elder  R.  left 
the  next  morning,  between  four  and  five  o'clock;  but  Mr. 
Miller  was  awake,  and  arose  to  take  an  affectionate  leave  of 
him. 


376  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 


CHAPTER     XXV. 

HIS  LAST  SICKNESS  AND  DEATH FUNERAL LETTER  OE  CONDO- 
LENCE TO  SURVIVING-  FRIENDS. 

For  several  months  he  had  been  confined  mostly  to  his 
room.  During  a  part  of  the  time  he  had  been  confined  to 
his  bed,  lounge,  or  easy-chair ;  and  he  suffered  excruciating 
pain,  which  he  endured  with  Christian  patience.  During 
his  greatest  sufferings  he  solaced  himself  by  quotations  of 
numerous  passages  of  Scripture,  and  favorite  hymns  of 
Watts  and  others,  expressive  of  the  hope  and  joy  of  the 
redeemed. 

He  had  watched  all  the  occurrences  in  Europe  with  great 
interest;  but,  giving  up  the  idea  of  seeing  the  Saviour 
before  his  death,  he  had  arranged  all  his  business,  and 
waited  for  the  summons  when  he  might  "depart  and  be 
with  Christ." 

On  the  13th  of  December  he  had  one  of  the  most  severe 
attacks  of  pain  which  he  was  called  to  endure.  It  was  then 
thought  he  would  not  survive  till  the  next  morning,  and 
Elder  Himes  was  immediately  telegraphed  for,  at  the  re- 
quest of  Mr.  M.     Mr.  Himes  wrote  : 

"  On  my  arrival,  early  in  the  morning  of  the  17th,  he 
had  obtained  some  relief,  and  was  quite  comfortable.  On 
entering  his  room,  he  immediately  recognized  my  voice,  and, 
on  approaching  his  bed-side,  he  was  able  to  distinguish  my 
features,  though  his  eyes  were  dim.  He  grasped  my  hand, 
and  held  it  for  some  time,  exclaiming,  with  much  earnest- 
ness, and  in  a  tone  of  affection  : 

"  <  Is  this  Elder  Himes  ?  —  Is  it  Elder  Himes  ?  —  0,  is 
it  Elder  Himes  ?     I  am  glad  to  see  you  ! ' 

"  i  Then  you  do  know  me,  Father  Miller,  do  you  V 

11  l  0  yes  ;  I  understand, —  I  know  what  is  passing.' 

"  He  was  then  silent  for  a  few  moments,  apparently  in  a 
deep  study.  Presently  he  introduced  the  subject  of  my 
connection  with  the  Advent  cause,  and  spoke  of  my  respon- 
sibility; expressed  much  anxiety  about  the  cause,  and 
alluded  to  his  own  departure.     I  assured  him  that  he  had 


HIS   LAST   SICKNESS.  377 

faithfully  discharged  his  duty,  was  clear  from  the  blood  of 
all  men.  and  could  now  leave  this  matter  in  the  hands  of 
God :  and,  so  far  as  I  was  concerned,  I  hoped  for  grace  to 
enable  me  to  be  faithful  in  the  ministry  I  had  received. 
He  seemed  to  assent,  and  fell  into  a  doze, —  being  weak, 
and  unable  to  converse  longer  than  a  few  moments  at  a 
time.     Presently  he  said  : 

"  '  Elder  Himes  has  come  :  —  I  love  Elder  Himes.' 

"  He  then  spoke  on  the  subject  of  the  '  Spirit  of  adop- 
tion,' which  we  have  now,  and  of  the  final  adoption,  for 
which  we  look  at  the  second  coming  of  the  blessed  Saviour. 
Last  evening  he  said  to  Bro.  Bosworth  : 

"  c  Tell  them  (the  brethren)  we  are  right.  The  coming 
of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh  :  but  they  must  be  patient,  and 
wait  for  him.3 

"  His  mind  is  still  clear  and  strong  on  the  subject  of  the 
conscious  intermediate  state.  He  believes  that  when  he 
shall  be  absent  from  the  body  he  will  be  present  with  the 
Lord.  He  expects  that  his  flesh  will  slumber  in  the  ground 
till  Jesus  comes  and  bids  it  rise,  when  he  will  be  perfected. 
He  never  looked  for  the  crown  at  death,  but  at  the  time 
when  Jesus  should  come  in  his  glory.  The  intermediate 
state  is  not  that  for  which  he  longs  most  (though,  with  the 
apostle,  he  thinks  that  it  is  'better'  than  this  state  of  toil 
and  sorrow),  but  the  final,  the  glorified  state,  when  the 
body  shall  be  redeemed,  and  made  like  unto  the  glorious 
body  of  Christ,  is  the  subject  of  this  hope. 

••  For  some  weeks  past  his  mind  dwelt  much  on  the  sub- 
jects of  the  judgment,  the  *  adoption,'  and  the  new  heavens 
and  earth.  The  following  hymns  very  much  interested  him. 
He  repeated  them  over  and  over,  and  requested  his  children 
to  sing  them.  He  seemed  to  be  greatly  comforted  in  hear- 
ing the  hymn  by  Dr.  Watts  — 

"  '  There  is  a  land  of  pure  delight, 
W^here  saints  immortal  reign  ; 
Infinite  day  excludes  the  night, 
And  pleasures  banish  pain,5  &c. 

"  He  was  also  very  fond  of  hearing  — 

"  '  In  the  midst  of  temptation,  and  sorrow,  and  strife, 
And  evils  unnumbered,  of  this  bitter  life. 


378  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

I  look  to  a  blessed  earth,  free  from  all  care, 
The  kingdom  of  Jesus,  and  long  to  be  there. 
Long  to  be  there,  long  to  be  there, 
The  kingdom  of  Jesus,  and  long  to  be  there,'  &c. 

"  Such  views  of  the  future  glory  tended  to  mitigate  the 
pains  of  his  body,  which,  at  times,  were  violent, 

M  B  Happy  the  spirit  released  from  its  clay,' 

was  one  of  the  hymns  in  which  he  was  deeply  interested 
during  the  last  four  weeks  of  his  life.  It  was  sung  by  his 
children,  and  those  who  visited  him,  repeatedly,  at  his  re- 
quest. It  enraptured  his  soul  during  his  last  hours,  when 
he  seemed  to  be  absent,  conversing  with  God  and  heaven. 
He  often  repeated  — 

M  i  Victory  !  victory  !  shouting  in  death  ! ' 

u  The  closing  scene  finally  came.  On  the  20th  of  De- 
cember, in  the  morning,  it  was  manifest  to  all  that  he  must 
soon  depart.  During  the  morning  he  made  no  particular 
conversation,  but  would  break  forth  in  expressions  like  the 
following  : 

"  '  Mighty  to  save  ! '  l  O,  I  long  to  be  there  ! '  l  Vic- 
tory !  victory  ! '      l  Shouting  in  death  ! '  &c. 

•  He  finally  sunk  down  into  an  easy  sleeping  or  dozing 
state.  Occasionally  he  roused  up,  and  opened  his  eyes,  but 
was  not  able  to  speak,  though  perfectly  rational,  and  knew 
us  all.  He  continued  to  breathe  shorter  and  shorter,  till  five 
minutes  past  three  o'clock,  p.  M.,  when  he  calmly  and  sweetly 
gave  his  last  breath.  The  silver  cord  was  loosed,  the 
golden  bowl  was  broken  at  the  fountain,  and  the  wheel 
broken  at  the  cistern :  the  dust  was  left  to  return  to  the 
dust  as  it  was,  and  the  spirit  returned  to  God  who  gave  it. 
Peacefully  and  happily  he  died,  with  his  wife,  children  and 
friends  about  his  bed !  I  closed  his  eyes,  while  all  other 
eyes  were  filled  with  tears.  It  was  a  solemn  scene.  While 
the  wife  and  children  and  friends  were  weeping  the  loss  of  a 
beloved  relative,  /  was  there  to  weep  the  loss  of  a  father  in 
Israel. 

"  The  funeral  service  was  attended  on  Sunday,  December 
23d.  The  Advent  chapel  in  Low  Hampton  being  too  small 
to  accommodate  the  family,  friends  and  citizens,  who  were 


FUXERAL   SERVICES.  8  *  9 

desirous  of  attending.  Mr.  Shaw,  pastor  of  the  Congrega- 
tional church  in  Fairhaven,  kindly  offered  the  use  of  his 
large  and  commodious  house.  It  had  been  Mr.  Miller's 
request  that  the  funeral  service  should  be  held  in  the  Advent 
chapel :  but.  this  being  found  impossible,  the  family  decided 
to  have  a  short  service  at  their  residence,  to  bury  the  body, 
and  then  to  proceed  to  the  Congregational  house,  for  the 
performance  of  the  more  public  service. 

'*  The  relatives  of  the  deceased,  and  a  large  number  of  his 
neighbors  and  others,  assembled  at  the  house  at  10  A.  M. 
I  read  the  following  portions  of  Scripture,  namely.  1  Thess. 
4  :  13—18 ;  Phil.  3  :  20,  21 ;  Col.  3  :  1—3.  The  choir 
from  the  Fairhaven  church  then  sung  the  hymn  commencing 
with  — 

"  '  Unveil  thy  bosom,  faithful  tomb.' 

After  a  prayer,  those  present  took  leave  of  the  corpse,  and 
the  procession  —  formed  under  the  direction  of  Dr.  Smith, 
of  Castleton  —  proceeded  to  the  old  family  burying-ground, 
about  half  a  mile  distant.  The  body  being  lowered  into  the 
tomb,  the  following  hymn  was  sung  by  the  choir  : 

"  '  Happy  the  spirit  released  from  its  clay.5  &c. 
11  With  a  last,  lingering  look,  we  turned  from  the  tomb, 


and  proceeded  with  the  numerous  friends  to  the  meeting- 
house, to  attend  the  more  public  service.  About  one  hun- 
dred sleighs  followed  in  the  procession. 

;,/  On  arriving  at  the  house.  I  found  it  denselv  filled  with 
people,  with  the  exception  of  seats  reserved  for  the  family, 
and  those  who  had  formed  the  procession.  The  service  was 
commenced  by  singing  the  hymn  in  the  Harp,  beginning 
with  — 

"  *  Hott  blest  the  righteous  Trhen  he  dies.' 

Mr.  Shaw,  pastor  of  the  church,  read  the  90th  psalm,  and 
addressed  the  throne  of  grace ;  after  which  the  hymn  — 

"  ■  Why  do  Tve  mourn  departed  Mends  ?  ' 

was  sung.     I  gave  a  discourse  from  Acts  26  :  6 — 8  :   '  And 
now  I  stand,  and  am  judged   respecting  the  hope   of  the 
promise  made  by  God  to  our  fathers  :  to  which  promise  our 
33 


380  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

twelve  tribes,  earnestly  serving  God  day  and  night,  hope  to 
attain :  respecting  which  hope,  King  Agrippa,  I  am  accused 
by  the  Jews.  What !  is  it  judged  an  incredible  thing  with 
you,  that  God  should  raise  the  dead  ? '  With  a  narration 
of  the  prominent  events  in  the  history  of  the  deceased,  and 
a  brief  synopsis  of  his  views,  the  speaker  presented  the  hope 
of  the  promise  of  God  to  the  fathers,  to  be  consummated  at 
the  coming  of  the  Lord.  The  services  lasted  three  hours, 
and  were  concluded  with  the  hymn  — 

"  *  They  sleep  in  Jesus,  and  are  blessed.' 

The  audience  were  attentive  and  interested  to  the  close. 

"J.    V.    HlMES." 

Mr.  Miller  left  a  wife,  six  sons,  and  two  daughters. 

At  the  Annual  Conference,  held  in  New  York,  in  May 
following,  by  a  unanimous  vote,  the  following  letter  of  con- 
dolence, prepared  by  a  committee  appointed  for  that  pur- 
pose, was  addressed  to  the  relatives  of  the  deceased  : 

"  In  Conference,  New  York,  May  8th,  1850. 
"  To  Mrs.  Lucy  Miller,  her  children,  and  other  rela- 
tives. 

"  Afflicted  Friexds: —  Since  our  last  meeting,  you 
have  been  called  to  mourn  the  death  of  a  beloved  husband, 
a  tender  parent,  and  an  affectionate  friend.  In  your  bereave- 
ment we  truly  sympathize.  In  your  loss  we  also  have  lost 
a  friend  and  brother.  But  we  mourn  our  loss  in  view  of 
higher  considerations.  We  regard  him  as  a  man  called  of 
God  to  a  most  important  work ;  and  as  a  man  greatly  blessed 
in  the  successful  performance  of  that  work.  The  unsullied 
integrity  of  his  life  was  crowned  by  a  peaceful  and  hopeful 
death.  The  deep  sense  of  gratitude  we  feel  to  God  for  the 
benefits  conferred  on  us,  through  his  instrumentality,  we 
trust  will  find  a  response  in  many  Christian  hearts. 
Through  the  divine  blessing  on  his  teaching,  our  attention 
has  been  directed  to  a  more  faithful  study  of  the  Scriptures, 
to  clearer,  more  harmonious  and  correct  views  of  divine 
truth.  We  have  thus  been  led  to  rejoice  in  hope  of  the 
glory  to  be  revealed  at  the  appearing  of  Christ.     We  fondly 


ON  THE  DEATH  OF  MR.  MILLER.        381 

hoped  that  he  might  have  been  spared  till  our  expectations 
were  realized.  He  has  passed  away.  May  we  remember 
that  our  obligations  are  increased  by  the  truth  which  he 
taught.  May  we  be  prepared  for  a  reunion  with  him  and 
all  the  redeemed  in  that  day.  Our  sincere  and  united 
prayer  is,  that  the  grace  which  sustained  him  under  his 
severe  trials,  and  in  the  closing  scene,  may  support  you 
in  your  bereavement,  and  in  all  the  afflictions  of  the  pres- 
ent state,  and  secure  to  you  the  enjoyment  of  the  glorious 
future.  Tendering  to  your  acceptance  this  expression  of 
our  sympathy  and  condolence,  we  remain  your  affectionate 
brethren  in  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints. 

"  (Signed,)     N.  N.  Whiting,  President. 

"  S.  Bliss,  \  S^etanes. 

The  death  of  Mr.  Miller  was  very  generally  noticed  by 
the  religious  and  secular  press,  many  of  whom  spoke  in  just 
terms  of  his  honesty  and  ability.  Other  papers  connected 
with  his  memory  extravagances  with  which  he  had  no  sym- 
pathy and  never  participated  in.  But  he  has  gone  into  His 
presence  who  will  right  all  wrongs,  reverse  all  unjust  con- 
clusions, and  mete  out  to  £ach  one  his  just  measure,  according 
to  the  deeds  done  in  the  body.  He  died  in  the  confident 
expectation  of  departing  to  be  with  Christ,  and  of  shortly 
participating  in  the  glories  of  the  first  resurrection. 

A  friend,  Mrs.  L.  H.  Smith,  communicated  the  following 
lines 

"  ON  THE  DEATH  OF  MR.  MILLER. 

"  Has  our  noble  old  soldier  resigned  his  last  breath.  ? 
On  the  battle-field's  front  has  he  yielded  to  death  ? 
Is  that  glorious  armor  now  low  in  the  dust  ? 
Are  its  splendor  and  brightness  now  marr'd  by  earth's  rust  ? 
Must  we  bear  him  away,  'midst  the  darkness  and  gloom 
That  shroud  and  pavilion  the  gates  of  the  tomb  ? 
But  stand  for  a  moment,  ye  who  bear  up  the  bier, 
Let  us  give  one  last  tribute  —  the  fast  rising  tear  ; 
Let  us  look  on  that  brow,  with  its  broad,  high  expanse  ; 
Let  us  gaze  on  the  veiled  eye,  once  bright  in  its  glance  ; 
And  that  marble  lip's  curl.  —  0  !  how  lifeless  and  still  ! 
How  the  touch  of  that  hand  brings  a  soul-thrilling  chill  ! 
Yet,  a  halo  of  glory  seems  shrouding  that  form, 
That  has  past  the  dread  tempest  of  life's  closing  storm  : 


682  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

It  was  left  by  the  spirit  that  upwards  has  fled, 
Surrounding  with  radiance  the  form  that  is  dead  ; 
Like  a  beautiful  star  that  's  departed  from  heaven, 
But  has  left  gleams  of  light  in  the  spot  where  9t  was  given  ; 
Or  a  sparkling  diamond  in  a  casket  fair, 
Though  removed,  yet  its  brilliance  seems  lingering  there. 
But,  bear  onward,  bear  onward  the  corse  to  its  sod  ; 
Tread  softly,  for  you  're  bearing  the  servant  of  God. 
But  where  are  the  laurels,  the  bright  wreaths  of  fame, 
And  the  heralds  announcing  his  deeds  and  his  name  ? 
"Where  the  gorgeous  procession,  tne  splendid  array, 
With  earth's  glorious  trappings,  its  pomp,  its  display? 
Him  you  bear  has  been  noble  in  deed  and  in  word  ; 
Mankind  he  has  served,  with  his  life,  with  his  sword. 
But  that  sword  was  the  Spirit's  —  his  armor  was  given 
From  the  arsenal  kept  in  the  high  courts  of  heaven. 
But  —  bear  onward,  bear  onward  the  corse  to  its  sod  ; 
Tread  softly,  for  you  're  bearing  the  servant  of  God. 

"  Farewell  to  thee,  pilgrim  ;  to  earth  thou  didst  come, 
Like  the  star  of  the  morning,  precorsing  the  sun. 
In  our  moral  horizon,  when  darkness  was  deep, 
When  the  world  seemed  all  wrapped  in  a  lethargic  sleep, 
When  the  mantle  of  death  hung  round  like  a  pall, 
And  his  sceptre  of  strength  seemed  to  wave  o'er  it  all  ; 
Then  the  light  of  thy  spirit  gleamed  forth  like  a  star 
On  the  beautiful  hope  of  the  land  that  's  afar  ; 
Then  the  gems  of  God's  word  were  brought  forth  from  the  mine, 
And  the  key  of  that  casket  of  glories  was  thine  ; 
And  then  on  thy  spirit  the  rich  light  was  poured, 
Of  the  beauty  of  earth,  with  its  Eden  restored, 
Xever  more  to  know  aught  of  a  withering  bloom, 
Never  more  on  its  besom  to  bear  up  a  tomb  ; 
But,  to  crown  all  these  glories,  that  time  must  soon  bring 
The  hope  of  God's  people  —  our'  conquering  King. 

M  Farewell  to  thee,  pilgrim  ;  no  green  wreaths  we  twine, 
In  token  of  honor  for  deeds  like  to  thine. 
From  the  hand  of  the  Master  that  bright  gift  must  be, 
That  can  bring  aught  of  glory  or  honor  to  thee. 
Rest  there,  beloved  sleeper,  'neath  the  snow-curtained  bed  ; 
Soon  the  mandate  shall  echo  —  e  Come  forth,  all  ye  dead  !  ' — 
Through  the  caverns  of  earth  where  God's  people  may  be, 
And  to  depths  of  the  coral  groves,  under  the  sea. 
Ye  who  bear  him  now  rest.  — Lower  the  corse  'neath  the  sod  ; 
Farewell  to  thee,  thou  faithful,  true  servant  of  God." 

The  remains  of  "William  Miller  repose  in  the  Low  Hampton 
Cemetery,  a  short  distance  east  of  his  late  residence.  The 
family  have  marked  the  spot  by  a  neat  monument,  the  pat- 
tern of  and  inscriptions  on  which  are  given  on  the  page  fol- 
lowing. 


WILLIAM    MILLER 

DEC.    20th,    1849, 
DJ  THE  68th  TEAR  OF  HIS  AGE. 

"  But  go  thou  thy  way  till  the  end  be, 
for  thou  shalt  rest,  and  stand  in  thy  lot 
at  the  end  of  the  days.'5 


The  enemy,   death,  how  long  will  he, 
In  triumph  o'er   God's   people  reign! 
When  Christ  shall  come  they  will  be  free; 
From   the   enemy's   land  return  again. 


CHAPTER    XXVI. 

EXTRACTS  FROM  MR.  MILLER'S  WRITINGS  —  THE  TIMES  AND  ITS 
DUTIES  —  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD  —  A  SCENE  OF  THE  LAST  DAY, 
ETC. 

Mr.  Miller's  published  writings  comprise  his  Sixteen 
Lectures  on  the  Prophecies,  his  Life  and  Views,  of  about 
three  hundred  pages  each,  and  a  number  of  pamphlets,  tracts, 
&c,  comprising  reviews  of  his  reviewers,  expositions  of 
Scripture,  &c. 

Dr.  Jarvis  remarked  that  he  had  "  often  been  edified  by 
his  excellent  and  pious  observations  on  the  necessity  of  being 
in  readiness  to  meet  our  Judge.'7 — Sermons,  p.  58.  He 
instanced  the  lecture  "  on  the  Times  and  its  Duties,"  and 
that  "  on  the  Parable  of  The  Ten  Virgins."  A  portion  of 
the  latter  has  already  been  given  ;  the  remainder  of  the  book 
is  devoted  to  the  former,  and  a  few  other  selections. 


''THE   TIMES   AND    ITS   DUTIES. 

"  '  The  night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand  :  let  us  therefore  cast  off 
the  works  of  darkness,  and  let  us  put  on  the  armor  of  light.' — Romans 
13  :  12. 

"  The  apostle  in  the  context  exhorts  his  Roman  brethren  to 
good  works,  to  a  holy  life  in  conformity  with  the  law, —  the 
royal  law,  which  teaches  us  to  love  God  with  all  our  heart, 
and  our  neighbor  as  ourselves.  He  then  gives  the  text  as  one 
of  the  most  prominent  reasons  why  we  should  conform  to  the 
requisitions  of  the  law  :  because  the  night  is  far  spent,  and 
the  day  is  at  hand. 

"  I  shall,  therefore,  in  explaining  the  text, 

"I.    Show  what    the    apostle   means    by    '  night 

AND    DAY.7 

"IX  Show  the  propriety  of  his  admonition,  'cast 

OFF   THE    WORKS    OF   DARKNESS.' 

"III.  Attend  to  his  exhortation,  'Let  us  put  on 

THE   ARMOR    OR  LIGHT.' 

"  I.  Explain  the  terms  night  and  day. 

"  Night  and  day  are  used  in  this  passage  to  illustrate  a 


THE   TIMES   AND   ITS   DUTIES.  385 

moral  or  spiritual  idea,  which  the  apostle  wished  to  commu- 
nicate to  his  brethren  at  Rome,  and  through  them  to  us.  1. 
Nighty  in  the  natural  world,  is  that  portion  of  time  in  which 
the  face  of  the  natural  sun  is  hid  from  us,  or  that  part  of 
our  earth  on  which  we  dwell,  in  accordance  with  certain 
infallible  laws  of  nature,  such  as  light  and  the  vivifying  influ- 
ence of  the  sun,  or  the  revolution  of  our  earth  upon  its  axis. 
2.  Night  in  the  moral  world  is  like  night  in  the  natural. 
God  is  the  fountain  of  all  light,  life,  and  holiness,  and  without 
his  vivifying  influence  we  are  left  to  grope  our  way  in  moral 
darkness.  We  cannot  see  things  clearly,  but  we  stumble  upon 
the  dark  mountains  of  infidelity  and  doubt.  This  great  Sun 
of  light,  life,  and  holiness,  is  governed  by  as  immutable  laws 
as  the  natural  sun,  yes,  and  ten  thousand  times  stronger, 
and  more  stable  ;  because  natural  laws  may  change ;  '  heaven 
and  earth  may  pass  away,'  but  not  one  jot  or  tittle  of  his 
word  or  law  shall  ever  fail.  One  of  these  unchangeable  laws 
is,  that  God  cannot  look  upon  sin  with  the  least  allowance. 
Witness  the  withdrawal  of  his  countenance  from  Adam  in  the 
garden  when  he  sinned,  and  the  beginning  of  the  night 
spoken  of  in  our  text.  Adam,  like  the  natural  world,  turned 
from  God,  and  all  was  darkness.  He  broke  the  holy  law, — 
1  thou  shalt  not  sin,' — and  he  and  all  his  posterity  became 
involved  in  a  moral  night,  with  only  now  and  then  some 
glimmering  star, —  some  Abel,  Enoch,  Noah,  some  patriarchs 
and  prophets, — or  a  changing  moon, —  the  church, —  to  shed 
a  glimmer  upon  this  moral  night,  that  may  haply  lead  us  to 
a  blessed  hope  of  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  Son  of  Man. 
The  ancient  prophets  and  apostles  all  prophesied  of  the  glory 
that  should  follow ;  these  were  stars  in  the  night  of  moral 
darkness.  The  church,  which  Christ  in  his  flesh  set  up  in 
the  world,  has  sometimes,  like  the  moon  at  its  stated  seasons, 
shown  her  full  round  face,  and  has  given  strong  evidence 
that  there  was  a  sun,  although  hid  from  the  immediate  view 
of  the  world,  and  that  she  looked,  by  faith  at  least,  upon  the 
glorious  Sun  of  Righteousness.  At  other  times  she  has  been 
veiled  in  a  cloud  of  smoke,  or  error,  which  rose  from  the  bot- 
tomless pit.  Sometimes  she  has  been  made  gory  by  the  per- 
secutions which  have  assailed  her ;  for  the  faithful  have 
waded  through  trials,  changes,  afflictions,  and  death.  Yet 
one  thing  have  they  all  shown  by  these  things,  that  this  is  not 


386  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

their  continuing  city  ;  but  that  they  seek  one  to  come,  whose 
builder  and  maker  is  God.  But  the  apostle  says  in  our  text 
that  this  night  (of  moral  darkness)  is  far  spent,  and  the  day 
is  at  hand  :  which  brings  us  to  consider. 

"  Second,  what  we  may  understand  the  apostle  as  meaning 
by  Day.  Natural  day  flows  immediately  from  light,  or  the 
great  luminary  of  the  heavens,  the  sun.  Just  so  the  moral 
day.  Wherever  God  by  his  immediate  presence  dwells,  and 
light,  life  and  righteousness  are  enjoyed,  there  is  day.  The 
gospel  is  sometimes  compared  to  the  sun  and  light,  and  where 
and  when  that  is  enjoyed,  it  is  sometimes  called  day.  as  in 
Zech.  14  :  7,  8  ;  Ps.  95  :  7.  <  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  his 
voice,  harden  not  your  hearts.' — Heb.  3  :  7. 

"  But  that  the  apostle  did  not  mean  this  gospel  day.  is  evi- 
dent from  the  text  immediately  preceding  :  '  For  now  is  our 
salvation  nearer  than  when  ice  believed.'  •'  For  the  night 
is  far  spent*  &c.  ;  strongly  expressing  it  to  be  future.  Xow 
if  it  meant  the  gospel  day,  why  did  the  apostle  call  the  time 
in  which  he  wrote  night  ?  Surely,  if  ever  the  gospel  shone 
in  our  world,  it  was  in  the  apostles'  days.  Then,  before  the 
antichristian  beast,  and  the  smoke  out  of  the  bottomless  pit. 
arose  on  the  earth,  and  darkened  the  sun.  and  filled  the 
world  with  corrupt  sentiments,  and  the  minds  of  men  with 
heretical  principles, —  before  the  obnoxious  vapors  of  the  doc- 
trine of  devils  filled  the  moral  air.  and  the  moon  was  turned 
to  blood,  and  the  stars  fell  to  the  earth. —  this  day  must  have 
been,  or  we  must  look  for  it  in  the  future. 

"  That  the  apostle  does  not  mean  the  gospel  day,  is  evident, 
also,  from  the  fact  that  he  gives  instructions  to  the  Roman 
Christians  how  to  obtain  the  gospel  armor,  which  was  to  be 
as  light  to  them  during  this  night  of  moral  darkness :  for  if 
it  had  been  day  their  armor  of  light  would  be  of  no  more 
use  than  a  candle  at  noon. 

"  Again.  The  day  spoken  of  cannot  mean  death  :  for  death 
is  nowhere  in  Scripture  called  day.  but  the  reverse.  i  The 
night  cometh,  when  no  man  can  work.' — John  9:  4.  Then 
I  know  not  what  day  the  apostle  alludes  to.  unless  he  has 
reference  to  the  great  day  when  '  Christ  shall  come  in  the 
clouds  of  heaven  with  power  and  great  glory.'  That  this 
day  is  what  the  apostle  meant,  is  evident, —  1.  Because  it 
is  a  day  of  salvation,  as  he  says  in  the  context — '  For  now 


THE   TIMES   AND   ITS   DUTIES.  387 

is  our  salvation  nearer  than  when  we  believed,'  and  c  he 
comes  the  second  time  without  sin  unto  salvation.'  Again, 
'  I  pray  God  your  whole  spirit  and  soul  and  body  be  pre- 
served blameless  unto  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.' 
1  To  the  end  he  may  stablish  your  hearts  unblamable  in 
holiness  before  God,  even  our  Father,  at  the  coming  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  all  his  saints.'  It  is  evident  that 
he  means  this  day,  also,  because  the  Sun  of  Righteousness 
will  then  live  and  dwell  on  the  earth,  and  he  shall  be  the 
light  thereof.  See  Mai.  4  :  2  :  '  But  unto  you  that  fear 
my  name,  shall  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  arise  with  healing 
in  his  wings,  and  ye  shall  go  forth  and  grow  up  as  calves  in 
the  stall.  And  ye  shall  tread  down  the  wicked ;  for  they 
shall  be  ashes  under  the  soles  of  your  feet,  in  the  day  that  I 
shall  do  this,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.'  Again,  in  Psalm  68  : 
18  :  i  Thou  hast  ascended  on  high,  thou  hast  led  captivity 
captive  :  thou  hast  received  gifts  for  men,  yea,  for  the  rebel- 
lious also,  that  the  Lord  God  might  dwell  among  them.' 
Zech.  2  :  10  :  '  Sing  and  rejoice,  0  daughter  of  Zion :  for 
lo,  I  come,  and  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  thee,  saith  the 
Lord,  and  many  nations  shall  be  joined  to  the  Lord  in  that 
day,  and  shall  be  my  people ;  and  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst 
of  thee.'  Again,  Rev.  21 :  8  :  '  And  I  heard  a  great  voice 
out  of  heaven,  saying,  Behold,  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with 
men,  and  he  will  dwell  with  them,  and  they  shall  be  his  peo- 
ple, and  God  himself  shall  be  with  them,  and  be  their  God.' 
This  is  the  day,  my  brethren,  which  the  apostle  Paul  alludes 
to  in  our  text ;  and  if  he  could  say,  eighteen  hundred  years 
ago,  'The  night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand,'  surely, 
my  brethren,  we  may  say  now  he  standeth  at  the  door.  And 
I  do  most  solemnly  believe  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  near, 
yes,  very  near.  '  Let  us,  therefore,  cast  off  the  works  of 
darkness.'     This  brings  us  to  our  second  head, —  to  show, 

'•II.  THE  PROPRIETY  OF  THE  ADMONITION,  '  CAST  OFE 
THE  WORKS  OF  DARKNESS.' 

"What,  then,  is  meant  by  works  of  darkness?  In  the 
first  place,  it  is  an  abhorrence  of  light,  for  fear  our  sins  will 
be  brought  to  light,  or  made  manifest.  '  We  love  darkness 
rather  than  light,  because  our  deeds  are  evil.'  These  char- 
acters may  be  known  by  their  anxiety  to  destroy  the  main 
principles  of  the  word  of  God.     Sin3  in  their  view,  is  noth- 


388  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

ing  more  than  a  misfortune;  salvation  is  only  the  good  deeds 
of  man ;  Christ  is  only  a  man  that  set  good  examples ; 
atonement  is  only  the  forgiveness  of  our  Adamic  sin ;  and 
punishment  is  only  the  evils  of  life  !  They  always  are  very 
uneasy,  and  often  angry,  if  future  punishment  is  mentioned. 
And  we  may  know  they  are  wrong ;  l  for  anger  rests  only  in 
the  bosom  of  fools.' 

••  Again,  there  is  another  class  who  work  the  works  of 
darkness.  These  are  those  who  are  ignorant  of  the  right- 
eousness  of  God,  and  go  about  (as  the  apostle  says)  to  es- 
tablish their  own  righteousness.  These  may  be  known  by 
their  complainings.  Nobody  is  right  but  themselves  ;  they 
are  always  justifying  their  own  ways  and  condemning  others; 
they  will  ever  be  framing  some  plausible  excuse  for  neglect 
of  any  duty,  and  condemning  others  for  the  merest  trifle. 
They  are  strange  characters.  You  may  preach  to  them  of 
their  crimes,  and  they  will  give  it  to  their  neighbor ;  you 
may  admonish  them,  and  they  regard  it  not.  They  are  so 
completely  shrouded  in  their  mantle  of  selfishness  that 
nothing  makes  any  impression  upon  them.  Preach  law, 
they  have  kept  it ;  preach  gospel,  they  need  it  not ;  preach 
duty,  they  will  throw  in  your  face  a  host  of  excuses.  Their 
coat  of  mail  is  like  the  hide  of  Leviathan, —  no  arrow  can 
pierce  it ;  and  I  have  thought  that  nothing  but  the  trump 
of  God  will  ever  awake  them.  Well  did  Christ  say  to  such 
characters,  i  0  generation  of  vipers,  how  can  ye  escape  the 
damnation  of  hell  ?  ' 

"  There  is  another  class,  whom  the  apostle  calls  '  worldly- 
minded  sinners,'  who  '  work  the  w^orks  of  darkness.'  These 
may  be  known  by  their  anxiety  for  the  world,  and  their  dis- 
regard for  all  the  means  of  salvation.  Visit  them,  and  their 
whole  mind  is  on  the  world ;  they  can  talk  freely  and  flip- 
pantly of  their  farms,  their  silver,  their  cattle,  and  sheep ; 
but  not  one  word  about  salvation.  They  can  go  into  a  long 
detail  of  their  plans  to  gain  property  ;  but  talk  to  them  of 
the  plan  of  salvation,  and  it  will  be  very  insipid  and  dry. 
The  week  is  spent  in  hoarding  up  treasures,  and  the  Sabbath 
in  counting  their  silver  and  casting  their  accounts.  They 
never  visit  the  house  of  God  without  some  worldly  motive  in 
view.  They  search  their  accounts  oftener  than  their  Bibles ; 
they  study  more  how  to  obtain  the  world  than  eternal  life. 


THE   TIMES   AND    ITS   DUTIES.  389 

In  one  word,  they  are  glued  to  the  present  evil  world ;  and, 
when  the  day  shall  come,  they  will,  with  the  rich  man,  lift 
up  their  ej'cs,  being  in  torment. 

"  There  is  still  another  class,  and  they  are  those  who  seek 
for  the  honors  of  this  world  more  than  to  honor  God,  hav- 
ing men's  persons  in  admiration.  In  their  works  of  darkness 
you  may  discover  them  ;  they  are  deceitful ;  their  words  are 
smooth  as  oil,  and  with  their  lips  they  use  deceit  They 
flatter  but  to  destroy;  they  deceive  but  to  betray ;  they  pre- 
tend to  be  friendly  to  all,  yet  are  friends  only  to  themselves. 
They  never  talk  plainly  or  open-heartedly,  butal  ways  wound 
in  private.  There  is  no  meanness  which  they  will  not  stoop 
to  do,  to  obtain  their  end.  Solomon  says,  '  He  that  knoweth 
and  dissembleth  with  his  lips,  and  layeth  up  deceit  within 
him,  when  he  speaketh  fair  believe  him  not,  for  there  are 
seven  abominations  in  his  heart.  Whose  hatred  is  covered 
by  deceit,  his  wickedness  shall  be  showed  before  the  whole 
congregation.'  '  But  the  fearful  and  unbelieving,  and  the 
abominable,  and  murderers,  and  whoremongers,  and  sorcer- 
ers, and  idolaters,  and  all  liars,  shall  have  their  part  in  the 
lake  which  burnetii  with  fire  and  brimstone ;  wThich  is  the 
second  death/'  —  Rev.  21  :  8.  If  these  things  are  so,  then 
surely  the  apostle  has  done  well  to  admonish  us  to  {  put  off 
these  works  of  darkness  ;'  and  0  !  my  hearers,  we  should  do 
well,  yes,  we  should  be  wise,  and  that,  too,  for  ourselves,  to 
obey  the  injunction  of  the  apostle  ;  '  for  the  night  is  far 
spent,  the  day  is  at  hand,  when  every  man's  works  will  be 
tried  so  as  by  fire.' 

"  III.  WE  WILL  N0Wr  EXAMINE  THE  APOSTLE'S  EXHORT- 
ATION, '  Let  us  put  on  the  armor  of  light.' 

•;  The  Christian,  in  this  night  of  darkness  and  error,  is 
compared  to  a  soldier  on  guard  in  the  night,  and  in  time  of 
war  ;  and  how  apt  and  instructing  is  the  allusion  !  In  the 
night,  on  guard,  a  soldier  must  have  his  armor  all  on ;  he 
must  not  lie  down  :  he  must  keep  awake,  not  sleep,  stand  at 
his  post ;  he  must  watch  the  approach  of  the  enemy,  hail 
the  approach  of  a  friend,  understand  the  use  of  his  armor, 
have  in  readiness  the  watchwords  of  the  camp ;  and  he  will 
watch  for  the  dawn  of  the  morning  with  as  much  anxiety  as 
a  bride  for  the  return  of  the  bridegroom.  Just  so  with  a 
Christian  in  this  night  of  moral  darkness.     He  is  called  to 


390  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

watch,  and  to  have  on  the  armor  of  light.  He  must  stand 
up,  and,  having  done  all,  must  stand.  He,  too,  must  keep 
awake,  as  says  the  prophet  Isaiah,  51:  17:  '  Awake,  awake, 
stand  up,  0  Jerusalem.'  He  must  not  sleep,  as  Paul  says, 
1  Thess.  5  :  6  :  '  Therefore  let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  others  ; 
but  let  us  watch  and  be  sober.'  He  must  watch  his  enemies 
both  outward  and  inward  ;  he  must  hail  and  rejoice  over  one 
sinner  that  repenteth ;  he  must  learn  and  understand  the 
use  of  his  spiritual  armor  ;  he  must  be  ready  with  the  wrord 
at  all  times,  so  that  he  may  give  the  reason  of  his  hope  with 
meekness  and  fear.  And,  if  he  is  a  good  soldier  of  Christ, 
he  will  watch  for  the  dawn  of  the  morning  when  the  Captain 
of  his  salvation  shall  come  the  second  time  without  sin  unto 
salvation  ;  when  his  enemies  will  all  be  slain,  and  the  shout 
of  victory  be  heard  by  all  the  righteous  dead,  and  the  last 
loud  blast  of  the  trump  of  God  shall  proclaim  universal  peace 
in  the  kingdom  of  Christ. 

"  Then  how  happy  will  that  soldier  of  the  cross  be  whom, 
when  his  Lord  comes,  he  shall  find  with  his  whole  armor  of 
light  on  !  So  doing,  c  stand,  therefore,  having  your  loins 
girt  about  with  truth.'  The  truth  will  make  you  free.  It 
will  strengthen  you  to  combat  error ;  it  is  all-powerful,  for 
God  is  truth,  and  He  hath  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth. 
You  will  never  be  afraid  that  your  cause  will  not  prevail ; 
for  truth  is  mighty  and  will  prevail.  You  will  never  want 
to  use  carnal  weapons,  for  the  holiness  of  truth  will  forbid 
the  thought ;  and  that  man  who  resorts  to  carnal  weapons  to 
support  his  cause,  may  depend  upon  it  he  is  not  on  truth. 

"  '  And  having  on  the  breastplate  of  righteousness.'  This, 
too,  is  the  armor  of  God,  prepared  for  us  by  Christ  himself. 
This  righteousness  will  give  us  confidence,  that  we  shall  not 
be  afraid  to  front  all  enemies,  even  death  itself,  knowing  that 
in  him  and  by  his  robe  we  shall  be  justified  from  all  things 
wTherein  the  law  could  not  justify ;  for  we,  being  weak  in 
the  flesh,  could  not  justify  ourselves  by  the  works  of  the 
law  ;  but  Christ  becoming  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteous- 
ness to  every  one  that  believeth,  we,  therefore,  may  have 
confidence,  wrho  have  fled  for  refuge,  to  lay  hold  on  the  hope 
set  before  us  ;  and  such  need  not  be  ashamed  before  him  at 
his  coming. 

11 '  And  your  feet  shod  with  the  preparation  of  the  gospel 


THE   TIMES   AND   ITS   DUTIES.  391 

of  peace.'  This  teaches  us  that  we  must  walk  after  the 
example  of  John,  who  prepared  a  people  made  ready 
for  the  Lord,  and  Christ,  who  fulfilled  all  righteousness. 
How  necessary,  my  brethren,  that  our  walk  be  found  ac- 
cording to  the  examples  of  Christ  and  the  apostles,  that 
our  feet  may  be  shod  with  the  gospel  of  peace,  that  we  may 
be  ready  to  enter  in  through  the  gate  into  the  city ! 

"  '  Above  all,  taking  the  shield  of  faith,  wherewith  ye  shall 
be  able  to  quench  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked.'  This  is 
an  important  part  of  the  armor.  Faith  is  able  to  carry  us 
through  all  the  trials  of  life.  By  faith  we  receive  and  enjoy 
all  the  rich  promises  of  God.  By  faith  we  live  upon  his 
Word,  as  the  children  of  Israel  lived  on  manna  in  the  wilder- 
ness. By  faith  we  please  God  ;  by  faith  we  believe  in  the 
day  spoken  of  in  our  text ;  and  through  faith  we  shall  be 
able  to  subdue  kingdoms,  work  righteousness,  obtain  prom- 
ises, stop  the  mouths  of  lions,  quench  the  violence  of  fire ; 
in  one  word,  come  off  conquerors  through  Him  who  hath 
loved  us. 

"  '  And  take  the  helmet  of  salvation.'  This  is  our  hope, 
and  the  evidence  of  this  can  be  obtained  only  by  our  dili- 
gence in  the  calling,  and  by  our  love  for  the  Author  of  our 
salvation.  How  do  we  know  that  we  are  in  a  state  of  sal- 
vation ]  Answer.  By  our  hope.  And  how  do  we  know 
our  hope  is  a  good  one  ?  By  its  being  founded  on  the  grace 
of  God,  and  not  on  our  works.  Then  the  speaker,  say  you, 
has  contradicted  himself,  for  he  has  just  told  us  that  hope 
was  obtained  by  our  diligence,  and  that  part  suited  his 
belief  exactly.  You  have  mistaken  me  ;  I  did  not  say  our 
hope  was  obtained  by  our  diligence,  but  the  evidence  of  its 
being  a  good  one.  Will  not  smoke  ascend,  and  will  not 
water  run  down  ?  If  you  have  a  good  hope,  you  have  a 
good  heart,  and  from  that  heart  will  proceed  good  fruits. 

"  Again  :  £  The  sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  Word  of 
God.'  This,  being  our  only  rule  of  life,  and  the  only 
means  of  trying  the  spirits,  may  be  truly  compared  to  a 
sword,  for  it  cuts  off  all  false  rules,  doctrines,  spirits,  and 
leaves  nothing  but  i  thus  saith  the  Lord.'  And  here, 
again,  we  may  try  ourselves.  In  every  trial  do  we  fly  to 
the  Word  of  God  for  direction  ?  Do  we  square  our  lives  by 
its  rules  ?  Is  this  Word  our  law-book,  our  directory  ?  And, 
like  David,  can  we  say,  '  How  love  I  thy  law  ? ' 


392  LITE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

"  [  Praying  always  with  all  prayer,  and  supplication  in  the 
Spirit,  and  watching  thereunto  with  all  perseverance  and 
supplication  for  all  saints.'  These  constitute  the  whole 
armor  of  light,  or  of  God,  as  the  apostle  calls  it  in  Eph.  6  : 
13.  Here,  again,  is  another  rule  to  try  ourselves  by.  Is 
prayer  a  solemn,  an  interesting,  and  soul-reviving  duty? 
Do  we,  in  trials,  in  afflictions,  in  joy  and  sorrow,  in  light  and 
darkness,  in  coldness  and  warmth.,  find  peace,  comfort,  con- 
solation, and  reconciliation,  in  this  duty  ?  Or  do  we  pray 
to  be  seen  of  men,  or  to  stop  the  gnawings  of  a  guilty  con- 
science 1  Or  do  we  neglect  this  weapon  altogether  ?  Let 
God  and  our  own  consciences  decide,  and  let  us  decide 
quickly  and  justly,  for  the  *'  day  is  at  hand  which  will  try 
every  man's  work,  whether  it  be  good  or  evil.'  —  'Let  us, 
then,  put  on  the  whole  armor  of  light.' 

11  IMPROVEMENT. 

"  1.  By  our  subject  we  learn  that  the  night  of  sin,  error, 
darkness,  and  every  evil  work,  is  almost  spent. 

"  2.  The  day  is  near  when  all  these  things  will  be  brought 
to  light,  and  every  evil  work  will  receive  a  just  recompense 
of  reward. 

"  3.  We  are  admonished  to  cast  off  the  works  of  darkness. 
And, 

"  4.  We  are  exhorted  to  put  on  the  armor  of  light." 


"  THE   KINGDOM    OF   GOD. 

"  '  And  in  the  days  of  these  kings  shall  the  God  of  heaven  set  up  a  king- 
dom which  shall  never  be  destroyed  ;  and  the  kingdom  shall  not  be  left 
to  other  people,  but  it  shall  break  in  pieces  and  consume  all  these  king- 
doms, and  it  shall  stand  forever.' — Daniel  2  :  44. 

"  Much  has  been  said  and  written  on  this  by  different  com- 
mentators. Different  sects  and  partisans  have  seized  this 
text,  and  applied  it  to  their  sect,  and  proved,  as  they  verily 
believe,  that  their  sect  is  the  true  kingdom  of  God,  which 
will  stand  forever. 

"  The  Catholics  say  it  was  set  up  in  the  days  of  the  Roman 
Caesars,  and  thus  claim  for  the  Pope  St.  Peter's  chair  and 


TIIE   KINGDOM    OF   GOD.  393 

the  kingdom  :  that  to  the  Bishop  of  Rome  were  the  keys  of 
this  kingdom  given  at  the  demise  of  St.  Peter,  and  that  the 
popes  have  been  the  successor  and  earthly  head  of  this 
kingdom  ever  since.  The  Baptist  writers,  many  of  them, 
say  the  same,  and  claim  a  descent  from  the  apostles  for  the 
Baptist  church,  —  making  the  church  what  the  Catholics  do 
the  Pope,  —  and  try  to  show  a  regular  succession  of  the 
church,  as  the  Catholics  do  their  popes.  They  also  claim 
believers'  baptism  {immersion)  as  an  initiatory  rite  into  the 
kingdom,  and  that  none  are  citizens  of  this  kingdom  until 
they  comply  with  this  requisition.  The  Episcopalians,  or 
some  of  them,  claim  this  same  kingdom  to  have  been  set  up 
in  the  days  of  the  kings  of  England;  and,  therefore,  the 
kings  or  queens  of  England  are  the  accredited  head  of  the 
episcopacy,  and  rulers  over  the  visible  church.  The  Pres- 
byterians say  it  was  set  up  in  the  days  of  Luther,  among 
the  German  kings ;  the  Quakers,  in  the  days  of  Fox ;  the 
Methodists,  in  the  days  of  Wesley;  the  Shakers,  in  the  days 
of  Ann  Lee  ;  and  the  Mormons,  by  Joseph  Smith. 

"  All  writers  seem  determined  to  have  an  earthly  kingdom, 
and  an  earthly  head  to  that  kingdom.  1  Cor.  3  :  3,  4 : 
1  For  ye  are  yet  carnal ;  for  whereas  there  is  among  you 
envying,  and  strife,  and  divisions,  are  ye  not  carnal,  and 
walk  as  men  ?  For  while  one  saith,  I  am  of  Paul ;  and 
another,  I  am  of  Apollos  ;  are  ye  not  carnal  ?  '  Or,  as  is 
properly  said  by  James  (3  :  14 — 16)  :  l  But  if  ye  have 
bitter  envying  and  strife  in  your  hearts,  glory  not ;  and  lie 
not  against  the  truth.  This  wisdom  descendeth  not  from 
above,  but  is  earthly,  sensual,  devilish.  For  where  envying 
and  strife  is,  there  is  confusion,  and  every  evil  work.' 

':  And  now  permit  me  to  show  that  this  kingdom  is  neither 
1  earthly,  sensual,  nor  devilish  ; '  but  I  shall  show  — 

"L  What  it  is; 

"  II.  Whose  it  is; 

"  III.  When  it  is;  and, 

"  IV.  Where  it  is. 

u  I.  What  it  is.  It  is  heavenly;  for  the  God  of  heaven 
sets  it  up,  that  is,  exalts  it.  It  is  evidently  a  holy  kingdom, 
for  the  will  of  God  is  to  be  done  in  it  as  in  heaven.  Luke 
11 :  2  :  '  And  he  said  unto  them,  when  ye  pray,  say,  Our 
Father  which  art  in  heaven,  hallowed  be  thy  name :  Thy 


394  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be  done,  as  in  heaven,  so  in 
earth.' 

"  It  is  a  righteous  kingdom.  See  Romans  14  :  17  :  '  For 
the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink,  but  righteous- 
ness, and  peace,  and  joy,  in  the  Holy  Ghost.' 

"It  is  an  everlasting  kingdom, —  *  shall  stand  forever,' 
says  our  text.  Psalm  145  :  12,  13  :  '  To  make  known  to 
the  sons  of  men  his  mighty  acts,  and  the  glorious  majesty 
of  his  kingdom.  Thy  kingdom  is  an  everlasting  kingdom, 
and  thy  dominion  endureth  throughout  all  generations.' 
Dan.  7  :  14,  27  :  i  And  there  was  given  him  dominion  and 
glory,  and  a  kingdom,  that  all  people,  nations,  and  languages, 
should  serve  him  ;  his  dominion  is  an  everlasting  dominion, 
which  shall  not  pass  away,  and  his  kingdom  that  which 
shall  not  be  destroyed.'  '  And  the  kingdom  and  dominion, 
and  the  greatness  of  the  kingdom  under  the  whole  heaven, 
shall  be  given  to  the  people  of  the  saints  of  the  Most  High, 
whose  kingdom  is  an  everlasting  kingdom,  and  all  dominions 
shall  serve  and  obey  him.'  Heb.  12  :  28:  'Wherefore, 
we  receiving  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be  moved,  let  us  have 
grace,  whereby  we  may  serve  God  acceptably,  with  rever- 
ence and  godly  fear.'  2  Pet.  1 :  11 :  6  For  so  an  entrance 
shall  be  ministered  unto  you  abundantly  into  the  everlasting 
kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.'  Rev.  11 : 
15 :  '  A.nd  the  seventh  angel  sounded ;  and  there  were 
great  voices  in  heaven,  saying,  The  kingdoms  of  this  world 
are  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord,  and  of  his  Christ, 
and  he  shall  reign  forever  and  ever.'  Rev.  22  :  5  :  '  And 
there  shall  be  no  night  there;  and  they  need  no  candle, 
neither  light  of  the  sun,  for  the  Lord  God  giveth  them 
light :  and  they  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever.' 

"  As  there  cannot  be  two  kingdoms,  and  both  stand  forever, 
we  must  naturally  suppose,  by  the  texts  which  I  have 
quoted,  that  it  must  be  a  glorified  kingdom  ;  and,  indeed, 
the  last  text  quoted  proves  it  to  be  in  the  New  Jerusalem 
state.  See,  also,  Psalm  24  :  7 — 10  :  l  Lift  up  your  heads, 
0  ye  gates,  and  be  ye  lift  up,  ye  everlasting  doors,  and  the 
King  of  glory  shall  come  in.  Who  is  this  King  of  glory  ? 
The  Lord  strong  and  mighty,  the  Lord  mighty  in  battle.  .  . 
Who  is  this  King  of  glory  ?  The  Lord  of  hosts,  he  is  the 
King   of  glory.'      Psalm  145  :  10,  11 :  ■  All   thy  works 


THE   KINGDOM   OF   GOD.  399 

seventh  angel  sounded;  and  there  were  great  voices  in 
heaven,  saying,  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  are  become  the 
kingdom  of  our  Lord,  and  of  his  Christ,  and  he  shall  reign 
for  ever  and  ever.'  Psalm  47  :  2,  9  :  <  For  the  Lord  most 
high  is  terrible;  he  is  a  great  King  over  all  the  earth.' 
1  For  God  is  the  King  of  all  the  earth :  sing  ye  praises  with 
understanding.'  Zech.  14  :  9  :  '  And  the  Lord  shall  be 
King  over  all  the  earth ;  in  that  day  shall  there  be  one  Lord, 
and  his  name  one.'  Rom.  9:5:  '  Whose  are  the  fathers, 
and  of  whom,  as  concerning  the  flesh,  Christ  came,  who  is 
over  all,  God  blessed  forever.  Amen.'  Rev.  21  :  3 : 
'  And  I  heard  a  great  voice  out  of  heaven,  saying,  Behold, 
the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,  and  he  will  dwell  with 
them,  and  they  shall  be  his  people,  and  God  himself  shall 
be  with  them,  and  be  their  God.'  These  texts  prove  the 
remainder  of  what  I  have  stated  above.  We  may  further 
inquire,  To  whom  is  the  kingdom  given  1 

u  Third  :  I  answer,  it  is  given  to  the  saints.  See  Dan. 
7  :  21,  22,  27  :  '  I  beheld,  and  the  same  horn  made  war 
with  the  saints,  and  prevailed  against  them ;  until  the  An- 
cient of  Days  came,  and  judgment  was  given  to  the  saints  of 
the  Most  High ;  and  the  time  came  that  the  saints  possessed 
the  kingdom.'  i  And  the  kingdom  and  dominion,  and  the 
greatness  of  the  kingdom  under  the  whole  heaven,  shall  be 
given  to  the  people  of  the  saints  of  the  Most  High,  whose 
kingdom  is  an  everlasting  kingdom,  and  all  dominions  shall 
serve  and  obey  him.'  Luke  12  :  32  :  (  Fear  not,  little 
flock,  for  it  is  your  Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  you  the 
kingdom.'  Matt.  25  :  34  :  <  Then  shall  the  King  say  unto 
them  on  his  right  hand,  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father, 
inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of 
the  world.'  James  2  :  5  :  '  Hearken,  my  beloved  brethren ; 
hath  not  God  chosen  the  poor  of  this  world,  rich  in  faith, 
and  heirs  of  the  kingdom  which  he  hath  promised  to  them 
that  love  him?'  2  Pet.  1 :  11 :  i  For  so  an  entrance  shall 
be  ministered  unto  you  abundantly  into  the  everlasting 
kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.'  These 
texts  prove  abundantly  that  the  saints  are  to  possess  and 
inherit  the  kingdom ;  and  that  it  is  the  everlasting  kingdom 
of  Jesus  Christ. 

"  III.   I  will  now  show  when  it  is  they  will  enter  this 


400  LIFE   OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

kingdom  and  inherit  it  forever.  Not  in  this  present  world ; 
for  in  this  world  they  are  to  suffer  persecution ;  also,  they 
are  strangers  and  pilgrims  in  this  world.  2  Tim.  3  :  12 : 
'  Yea,  and  all  that  will  live  godly  in  Jesus  Christ  shall  suf- 
fer persecution.'  1  Pet.  2  :  11  :  '  Whereas  angels,  which 
are  greater  in  power  and  might,  bring  not  railing  accusation 
against  them  before  the  Lord.'  Heb.  11 :  13,  14:  'These 
all  died  in  faith,  not  having  received  the  promises,  but  hav- 
ing seen  them  afar  off,  and  were  persuaded  of  them,  and 
embraced  them,  and  confessed  that  they  were  strangers  and 
pilgrims  on  the  earth.  For  they  that  say  such  things,  de- 
clare plainly  that  they  seek  a  country.'  Also,  verse  16  : 
•  But  now  they  desire  a  better  country,  that  is.  an  heavenly  ; 
wherefore  God  is  not  ashamed  to  be  called  their  God :  for 
He  hath  prepared  for  them  a  city.' 

"  But  it  is  at  the  coming  of  Christ  with  power  and  great 
glory,  when  he  shall  come  in  the  clouds  and  in  his  kingdom. 
See  Dan.  7  :  13,  14  :  'I  saw  in  the  night  visions ;  and,  behold, 
one  like  the  Son  of  Man  came  with  the  clouds  of  heaven,  and 
came  to  the  Ancient  of  Days,  and  they  brought  him  near 
before  him.  And  there  was  given  him  dominion,  and  glory, 
and  a  kingdom,  that  all  people,  nations,  and  languages, 
should  serve  him  :  his  dominion  is  an  everlasting  dominion, 
which  shall  not  pass  away,  and  his  kingdom  that  which  shall 
not  be  destroyed.'  Matt.  25 :  31—34  :  '  When  the  Son 
of  Man  shall  come  in  his  glory,  and  all  the  holy  angels  with 
him,  then  shall  he  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his  glory.  And 
before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  nations ;  and  he  shall  sepa- 
rate them  one  from  the  other,  as  a  shepherd  divideth  his 
sheep  from  the  goats.  And  he  shall  set  the  sheep  on  his 
right  hand,  but  the  goats  on  the  left.  Then  shall  the  King 
say  unto  them  on  his  right  hand.  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my 
Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world.'  1  Thess.  2:  12:  'That  ye 
would  walk  worthy  of  God,  who  hath  called  you  unto  his 
kingdom  and  glory.'  1  Thess.  3:  13:  'To  the  end  he 
may  stablish  your  hearts  unblamable  in  holiness  before  God, 
even  our  Father,  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
with  all  his  saints.'  2  Tim.  4  :  1  :  ;  I  charge  thee  there- 
fore before  God,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  shall  judge 
the  quick  and  the  dead  at  his  appearing  and  his  kingdom.' 


THE   KINGDOM    OF    GOD.  401 

Also,  verse  8  :  c  Henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown 
of  righteousness,  which  the  Lord  the  righteous  Judge  shall 
give  me  at  that  day ;  and  not  to  me  only,  but  unto  all  them 
also  that  love  his  appearing.' 

"  It  will  be  after  the  resurrection  ;  for  when  Christ  comes 
he  will  reward  his  saints  with  his  kingdom,  as  wTe  have 
proved.  Matt.  16  :  27 :  '  For  the  Son  of  Man  shall  come 
in  the  glory  of  his  Father,  with  his  angels ;  and  then  he 
shall  reward  every  man  according  to  his  works.'  Then  the 
kingdom  of  God  is  not  yet  set  up?  No.  But  our  text 
tells  us  it  will  be  set  up  in  the  days  of  those  kings.  What 
kings  ?  I  answer  :  the  ten  toes,  of  which  he  had  just  been 
speaking,  are  a  representation  of  ten  kingdoms,  into  which  the 
iron,  or  fourth  kingdom,  should  be  divided.  Compare  Dan. 
2  :  41,  42,  with  Dan.  7  :  23,  24  :  .'  And  whereas  thou 
sawest  the  feet  and  toes,  part  of  potter's  clay  and  part  iron, 
the  kingdom  shall  be  divided,  but  there  shall  be  in  it  of  the 
strength  of  the  iron,  forasmuch  as  thou  sawest  the  iron 
mixed  with  clay.  And  as  the  toes  of  the  feet  were  part  of 
iron  and  part  of  clay,  so  the  kingdom  shall  be  partly  strong, 
and  partly  broken.'  •  Thus  he  said,  The  fourth  beast  shall 
be  the  fourth  kingdom  upon  earth,  which  shall  be  diverse 
from  all  kingdoms,  and  shall  devour  .the  whole  earth,  and 
shall  tread  it  down  and  break  it  in  pieces.  And  the  ten 
horns  out  of  this  kingdom  are  ten  kings  that  shall  arise  : 
and  another  shall  arise  after  them  :  and  he  shall  be  diverse 
from  the  first,  and  he  shall  subdue  three  kings.' 

1 1  Then  our  text  more  than  implies  that  these  ten  kings  are 
to  be  in  existence  until  Christ  shall  come  and  dash  them  to 
pieces,  and  they  be  destroyed  by  the  brightness  of  his  coming. 
2  Thess.  2:8:  'And  then  shall  that  Wicked  be  revealed, 
whom  the  Lord  shall  consume  with  the  spirit  of  his  mouth, 
and  shall  destroy  with  the  brightness  of  his  coming.'  Also, 
Dan.  2 :  45  :  '  Forasmuch  as  thou  sawest  that  the  stone  was 
cut  out  of  the  mountain  without  hands,  and  that  it  brake  in 
pieces  the  iron,  the  brass,  the  clay,  the  silver,  and  the  gold ; 
the  great  God  hath  made  known  to  the  king  what  shall  come 
to  pass  hereafter :  and  the  dream  is  certain  and  the  inter- 
pretation thereof  sure.'  These  passages  are  as  simple  and 
as  plain  as  words  can  make  them.  And  I  am  bold  to  say, 
that  no  one  will,  or  can,  consistently  with  common  sense,  deny 


402  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

that  these  ten  toes  do  denote  ten  kings ;  and  I  have  never 
yet  seen  any  but  scoffers,  sceptics  or  infidels,  who  would 
deny  it.  If  these  ten  toes  do  represent  ten  kings  or 
kingdoms,  as  all  good  expositors  do  admit,  there  can  hardly 
be  a  shadow  of  a  doubt  but  we  are  on  the  very  close  of  the 
kingdoms ;  for  they  have  now  existed  more  than  1300  years, 
and  this  is  a  greater  proportion  than  other  parts  of  the  image 
have  borne  with  reference  to  time.  And  had  we  no  other 
rule,  we  ought  to  be  near  our  watch-tower  night  and  day,  lest 
he,  Christ,  come  and  find  us  sleeping. 

"  IV.  I  will  now  show  where  this  kingdom  is  to  be. 
And,  1.  It  is  to  be  under  the  whole  heaven.  See  Dan.  7  : 
27.  Phil.  2:  9,  10:  <  Wherefore  God  also  hath  highly 
exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  name  which  is  above  every 
name ;  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow, 
of  things  in  heaven,  and  things  in  earth,  and  things  under 
the  earth.'  2.  It  is  to  be  on  the  earth.  Psalm  2:8: 
1  Ask  of  me,  and  I  shall  give  thee  the  heathen  for  thine  in- 
heritance, and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  thy  pos- 
session.' Also,  25  :  13  :  i  His  soul  shall  dwell  at  ease,  and 
his  seed  shall  inherit  the  earth.'  37 :  9 :  '  For  evil-doers 
shall  be  cut  off:  but  those  that  wait  upon  the  Lord,  they 
shall  inherit  the  earth.'  Verse  11  :  '  But  the  meek  shall 
inherit  the  earth ;  and  shall  delight  themselves  in  the  abun- 
dance of  peace.'  Also,  verse  22  :  l  For  such  as  be  blessed 
of  him  shall  inherit  the  earth  ;  and  they  that  be  cursed  of 
him  shall  be  cut  off'  Isa.  60  :  21 :  '  Thy  people  also  shall 
be  all  righteous ;  they  shall  inherit  the  land  forever,  the 
branch  of  my  planting,  the  work  of  my  hands,  that  I  may 
be  glorified.'  Rev.  5  :  10:  'And  hast  made  us  unto  our 
God  kings  and  priests;  and  we  shall  reign  on  the  earth.' 
3.  It  will  be  called  a  new  earth.  Isa.  65 :  17 :  '  For  be- 
hold, I  create  new  heavens,  and  a  new  earth  :  and  the  for- 
mer shall  not  be  remembered,  nor  come  into  mind.'  Isa. 
66  :  22 :  '  For,  as  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth 
which  I  will  make  shall  remain  before  me,  saith  the  Lord, 
so  shall  your  seed  and  your  name  remain.'  2  Pet.  3  :  13  : 
1  Nevertheless,  we,  according  to  his  promise,  look  for  new 
heavens  and  a  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness.' 
Rev.  21 :  1 :  '  And  I  saw  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  : 
for  the  first  heaven  and  the  first  earth  were  passed  away,  and 


THE   KINGDOM   OF   GOD.  403 

there  was  no  more  sea.'  Also,  verse  5  :  l  And  he  that  sat 
upon  the  throne  said.  Behold,  I  make  all  things  new.  And 
he  said  unto  me,  Write ;  for  these  words  are  true  and  faith- 
ful.5 

"  By  the  proof  thus  adduced  wTe  see  that  the  kingdom 
spoken  of  in  our  text  is  not  earthly ;  for  the  kingdoms  of 
the  earth  are  broken  to  pieces  and  carried  away,  and  no 
place  found  for  them.  It  is  not  sensual, — man  ruling  over 
man,  or  tyrannizing  over  his  fellow ;  but  each  will  do  as  he 
would  have  others  do  unto  him,  and  each  will  love  his  neigh- 
bor as  himself.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  then,  that  a 
rich  man  cannot  easily  enter  this  kingdom,  nor  one  who 
lords  it  over  his  fellow ;  for  the  meek  only  can  inherit  it. 
This,  too,  shows  why  kings,  captains,  and  mighty  men  are 
destroyed  in  the  great  battle  of  God  Almighty ;  for  those 
spirits  and  principles  cannot  exist  in  the  kingdom  of  God. 
We  learn,  too,  by  this  view,  why  the  earth  is  cleansed  by 
fire  ;  for  the  proud  and  all  that  do  wickedly  must  be  con- 
sumed out  of  it.  See  Matt.  13:  41,  42:  'The  Son  of  Man 
shall  send  forth  his  angels,  and  they  shall  gather  out  of  his 
kingdom  all  things  that  offend,  and  them  which  do  iniquity ; 
and  shall  cast  them  into  a  furnace  of  fire ;  there  shall  be 
wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth.5  This,  too,  accounts  for  the 
scoffers  in  these  last  days  ;  for  they  well  know,  if  the  king- 
.  dom  is  to  be  a  righteous  one,  they  themselves  can  have  no 
part  in  it.  We  also  learn  by  this  why  some  of  our  doc- 
tors of  divinity  and  professors,  some  of  our  reverends  and 
clergy,  some  of  our  editors  and  Christian  teachers,  as 
they  wish  to  be  called,  are  so  strongly  opposed  to  this  doc- 
trine. They  know,  if  Christ  should  come,  he  would  not  re- 
gard their  high-sounding  titles  nor  their  dogmatical  teach- 
ings ;  they  know  that  the  great  aim  of  some  has  been  to  seek 
honors  of  men  and  worldly  profits,  and  their  trade  is 
in  danger.  The  spiritual  reign  and  conversion  of  the 
world  has  been  their  hobby,  and  they  hug  to  the  foolish 
idea  of  converting  the  world  to  their  dogmas  and  faith  by 
means  of  money  and  sectarian  missionaries.  As  well  may 
they  undertake  to  dip  the  ocean  dry  with  a  fireman's  bucket 
as  to  convert  the  world  with  their  sectarian  motives  and 
party  creeds.  How  can  men  be  so  ignorant  as  not  to  see 
that  every  convert  only  makes  the  rent  worse,  and  every 


404  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

year  divisions  and  subdivisions  increase  ?  Can  a  kingdom 
thus  torn  and  divided  stand  for  :  millions  of  years,' — as  one 
of  the  sectarian  editors  lately  proclaimed,  —  and  our  dear 
Saviour  be  correct,  Matt.  12  :  25  :  '  And  Jesus  knew  their 
thoughts,  and  said  unto  them,  Every  kingdom  divided  against 
itself  is  brought  to  desolation ;  and  every  city  or  house 
divided  against  itself  shall  not  stand '  ]  We  know  they  can- 
not be  true. 

"  Every  discerning  mind  knows  that,  at  the  present  time, 
the  Roman  church  are  making  two  proselytes  to  the  Protest- 
ants' one ;  and  all  must  agree  that,  of  those  converted  by 
Protestants,  one-half,  or  nearly  so,  are  mere  nominal  pro- 
fessors. Well  may  we  say,  t  millions  of  years '  must  pass 
away  before  our  world  could  be  converted.  But  I  ask,  what 
man  of  common  sense,  who  has  read  and  believes  his  Bible, 
can  for  a  moment  believe  that  £  millions  of  years  J  must  inter- 
vene before  Christ  will  come  ?  How  different  did  the  apostle 
Peter  preach  from  this  !  1  Pet.  4  :  7  :  '  But  the  end  of  all 
things  is  at  hand ;  be  ye,  therefore,  sober,  and  watch  unto 
prayer.'  Also  Christ,  Rev.  22  :  12  :  i  And  behold,  I  come 
quickly ;  and  my  reward  is  with  me,  to  give  every  man  ac- 
cording as  his  work  shall  be.'  And  20  :  '  He  which  testi- 
fied these  things  saith,  '  Surely  I  come,  quickly ;  Amen. 
Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus.'  Likewise  James,  5 :  8,  9  : 
'  Be  ye  also  patient ;  establish  your  hearts  ;  for  the  coming 
of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh.  Grudge  not  one  against  another, 
brethren,  lest  ye  be  condemned  ;  behold,  the  Judge  standeth 
before  the  door.' 

1  i  Much  more  Scripture  might  be  produced  to  show  we 
are  on  the  end  of  the  world.  Yet  the  Scripture  is  fulfilling 
to  the  very  letter  by  those  scoffers  of  the  present  day,  who 
say,  f  Where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming  ? '  and,  also,  who 
'  say  in  their  hearts,  My  Lord  delayeth  his  coming.'  And 
some  of  them  are  so  awfully  daring  as  to  publish  openly  and 
boldly  to  the  world  that  he  will  not  come  this  '  million  of 
years  yet.'  Strange  infatuation  !  It  is  time  for  all  who 
sincerely  love  our  Lord  to  awake  from  their  slumbers,  trim 
their  lamps,  and  be  ready ;  for  the  Bridegroom  is  at  the  door. 
Why  will  you  be  so  backward  in  believing  God's  word  ?  Can 
you  not  discern  the  signs  of   the  times? 

"  I  beseech  you3  0  sinner!   do  not  hear  to  those  who 


A  SCENE   OF  THE  LAST  DAY.  405 

will  deceive  you.  Look  for  yourselves ;  read,  study,  and 
consider  for  yourselves.  You  may  depend  upon  it,  every 
important  movement  of  the  nations,  of  the  church,  of  sects, 
and  societies,  of  the  world,  denotes  the  end  of  all  things 
at  hand.  A  few  more  days  to  be  numbered,  and  time  will 
be  no  more.  Regard  not  those  teachers,  who  are  crying  peace 
and  safety,  when  sudden  destruction  cometh  ;  that  say,  '  My 
Lord  delay eth  his  coming.'  Be  warned  by  one  who  feels  for 
your  souls.  I  ask  not  for  your  honors,  nor  for  your  money ; 
let  them  perish  with  the  world.  I  ask  you  to  escape  for 
your  life,  your  eternal  life.  0  save,  save  your  soul !  Think 
of  that  world  which  will  never  end,  of  that  state  which  will 
never  be  changed.  Think,  my  dear  friend,  of  your  own 
good ;  buy  the  truth,  buy  oil,  buy  wine  and  milk,  without 
money  and  without  price.  Come,  ye  poor,  take  hold  of  the 
riches  which  can  never  perish;  eat,  0  !  eat  and  drink  of 
that  food  which  can  never  cloy,  which,  if  a  man  eat  of,  he 
shall  live  forever.  Come,  ye  sick,  here  is  health  for  you  ; 
ye  lame,  you  will  find  strength ;  yes,  weary  ones  may  find 
rest,  and  captives  go  free.  The  bars  of  the  prison-house 
will  be  broken,  and  the  shackles  of  the  slaves  will  be  un- 
loosed. Captain  Jesus  is  knocking  at>  the  door ;  King 
Immanuel  will  soon  come  in.'3 


A   SCENE   OF   THE    LAST   DAY. 

"  The  supposed  reflections  of  a  sinner,  witnessing  the  solemn  events 
which  immediately  precede  and  follow  the  second  advent  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  and  the  conflagration  of  the  world." 

"  c  Ah  !  what  means  that  noise  ?  Can  that  be  thunder  ? 
Too  long,  too  loud  and  shrill ;  more  like  a  thousand  trum- 
pets sounding  an  onset.  It  shakes  the  earth  .  .  .  See,  see,  it 
reels !  How  dreadful !  how  strange  !  .  .  Another  phenomenon 
to  frighten  poor,  ignorant  fanatics.  I  will  not  be  afraid. 
Let  Nature  play  her  fantastic  gambols.  My  soul's  too 
brave  to  shake,  too  big  to  be  afraid.     When  the  stars  fell 


406  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

like  hailstones  I  stood  unmoved,  and  laughed  at  others'  fears. 
They  passed  away,  and  all  was  calm  again.  It  was  one  of 
nature's  freaks.  So  oft  of  late  has  nature  played  her  tricks, 
methinks  'tis  natural.  There  was  a  time  when  superstition 
reigned.  The  world  would  then  have  said  —  ah,  yes.  and 
believed  it.  too  — that  these  denoted  war.  bloodshed,  and 
great  convulsions  among  men ;  but  now  the  world  has  be- 
come more  wise  :  they  are  not  fools  and  cowards,  as  our 
forefathers.  .  .  .  Hark  !  another  sound,  more  long, 
more  loud,  more  dreadful  still !  Rock,  rock  !  the  world  is 
rocking  men.  like  babes,  to  sleep.  I  will  not  yet  be  scared. 
This  may  be  natural.  The  wind  is  pent  up  in  the  bowels 
of  the  earth,  and.  in  seeking  vent,  makes  all  this  uproar. 
These  noises  in  the  earth  and  roarings  of  the  sea.  which  have 
of  late  made  timid  mortals  shake,  by  this  philosophy  are  all 
accounted  for.  I  am  not  shaken  yet.  Xature  will  work 
her  own  cure  ;  and.  while  these  Christian  fools  are  trembling 
under  their  vain  imaginations  of  these  sights  and  signs  of 
the  great  last  day,  I  stand  on  ...  A  third  great 
blast  — a  shout,  a  cry  !  What  means  this  wild  roar  ?  I  '11 
go  and  see.     .     .     . 

"  .  .  .  (  Ah  !  I  thought  it  so.  Aurora  borealis  !  ' 
[Speaking  to  the  multitude. \  •  Ye  fools  and  cowards  all ! 
why  do  you  make  ado  about  this  so  common  sight  7  Have 
you  not  often  seen,  within  a  few  years  past,  the  heavens 
almost  as  brilliant  as  now. —  what  the  vulgar  illiterate  called 
';'  fire,  and  blood,  and  pillars  of  smoke:"  and  then  it  passed 
away,  and  nothing  was  left  but  to  ridicule  each  other's  fears? 
And  so  now :  this  will  soon  pass  a 

"  .  .  .  {  But  it  increases.  See.  see,  how  brilliant ! 
The  very  clouds  are  bright  with  glory.  It  rolls  and  gathers 
to  the  zenith.  .  .  .  Hark !  hark !  another  sound, 
more  deep  ;.  a  fourth,  more  loud  and  long  ;  a  second  shout  ! 
''tis  like  the  human  voice  :  it  is  the  wind,  the  electric  fluid 
in  the  air.  See,  see!  the  heavens  do  shake!  the  clouds, 
the  light,  the  air,  are  trembling  yet.  .  .  .  And  yet  the 
light  rolls  on,  the  cloud  grows  brighter,  and  the  rays  diverge 
from  yonder  point,  An  eye  !  an  eye  !  how  like  the  All- 
seeing  Eye  !     I  will  not  tremble  yet.     These  coward  souls 

shall  never  see  me  sha r-%     What  !  yet  another  crack  ! 

How  deafening  to  the  ear  !    Another  shout !    .    .    .    Sure, 


A  SCENE   OF   THE   LAST  DAY.  407 

that  was  a  shout  of  men  ;  I  hear  them  still.  The  mountains 
shake  and  tremble  on  their  base  ;  the  hills  move  to  and  fro  ; 
the  compass-needle  has  forsaken  the  pole,  and  leaps  towards 
the  zenith  point.  The  sea  has  fled  its  bounds,  and  rivers 
backward  in  their  channels  run.  What  can  this  mean  ?  Is 
nature  in  a  fit  1  .  .  .  The  light !  the  light !  it  still 
approaches  nearer  to  the  earth  —  and  brighter,  too  ;  it  daz- 
zles my  weak  sight.  Is  it  a  comet,  or  some  other  orb,  that 
has  strayed  from  its  track,  and,  by  the  laws  of  gravitation, 
is  approaching  to  our  earth  ?  Now  for  the  laws  of  nature 
here 's  a  struggle  !  and  if  that  other  law,  repulsion,  does 
not  repel  its  force  and  drive  it  back,  then  surely  this  poor, 
dark,  sublunary  globe  must  be  drowned  in  a  sphere  of  fire  ; 
and  where  will  mortals  .  .  .  Another  sound  !  a  dreadful 
blast,  a  hundred-fold  more  loud  than  former  trumpets  ! 
This  shakes  my  soul ;  my  courage,  too,  has  fled.  What  but 
a  Gabriel's  trump  could  give  such  sounds  —  so  loud,  so  long, 
so  clear  ?  .  .  .  Look !  see !  the  sun  has  veiled  his 
face ;  all  nature  heaves  a  groan,  one  deep-drawn  sigh,  and 
all  is  still  as  death.     .     .     . 

"  'The  clouds  —  those  vivid  clouds,  so  full  of  fire— are 
driven  apart  by  this  last  blast,  and,  rolling  up  themselves, 
stand  back  aghast.  And,  0,  my  soul,  wThat  do  I  see  ?  A 
great  white  throne,  and  "One  upon  it.  His  garment  is  whiter 
than  the  driven  snow,  and  the  hair  of  his  head  is  like  the  pure 
wool.  See  fiery  flames  issuing  from  his  throne,  rolling  down 
the  vault  of  heaven  like  wheels  of  burning  fire.  Before  him 
are  thousands  and  thousands  of  thousands  of  winged  ser- 
aphim, ready  to  obey  his  will.  See  Gabriel,  the  great  arch- 
angel, raising  his  golden  trump  to  his  mouth.  The  last  great 
trumpet  sounds, —  one  heavenly  shout, —  and  in  a  moment 
every  angel  flies,  each  different  ways,  in  rays  of  light,  to  this 
affrighted  globe.  The  earth  now  heaves  a  throb  for  the  last 
time,  and  in  this  last  great  throe  her  bowels  burst,  and  from 
her  spring  a  thousand  thousand,  and  ten  thousand  times 
ten  thousand  immortal  beings  into  active  life.  And  then 
those  few  who  had  looked  on  the  scene  with  patient  hope, 
were  suddenly  transformed,  from  age  to  youth,  from  mortal 
to  immortal ;  and  thus  they  stood,  a  bright  and  shining  band, 
all  clothed  in  white,  like  the  bright  throne  which  yet  appeared 
in  heaven. 

35* 


408  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

"  '  While  I  stood  gazing  on  this  heavenly  band,  I  saw  the 
winged  seraphs,  who  had  come  from  the  great  white  throne 
when  the  seventh  trumpet  sounded,  standing  among  them. 
"  All  hail !  "  they  cried,  "  ye  blood- washed  throng  — arise, 
and  meet  your  Saviour  in  the  middle  air."  They  clapped 
their  wings,  and  the  next  moment  all  the  air  was  full  of  the 
bright  seraphs  and  their  train  of  immortals  whom  I  late  had 
seen  spring  from  the  earth.  I  saw  them  pass  through  the 
long  vista  of  the  parted  cloud,  and  stand  before  the  throne. 
Then  I  beheld  one,  like  the  sons  of  men,  came  on  a  cloud, 
whose  rays  of  brightness  filled  the  upper  vault  with  radiant 
streams  of  light,  more  brilliant  than  a  thousand  suns.  He 
came  before  the  throne,  and  then  I  heard  the  shout  of  the 
celestial  host,  which  filled  the  upper  regions  with  a  sound 
that  echoed  down  to  earth,  and  made  the  dark  spirits  in  the 
pit  of  woe  shriek  out  in  lamentations  of  dread  despair.  It 
was  a  shout  of  victory.  A  thousand  harps  were  tuned,  and 
soon  the  heavenly  choir  sang  hallelujah  to  the  Lamb  of  God. 
Thrice  they  repeated  the  grand  chorus,  and  thrice  with 
shouts  of  these  young  immortals  did  the  arch  of  heaven  echo 
back  to  earth  this  shout  of  victory  ;  when  suddenly  the  cloud, 
which  late  had  parted  to  give  this  view  to  earth,  rolled  up 
the  vault  of  heaven  its  dark  and  sable  mass  from  the  horizon, 
■until  it  closed  from  view  the  great  white  throne,  and  Him 
that  sat  upon  it,  and  wrapt  this  globe  in  darkness,  such  as 
covered  Egypt  when  Moses  stretched  his  rod  over  the  land 
of  Pharaoh. 

"  '  The  air  now  became  stagnated  with  heat ;  while  the  dis- 
mal howlings  of  those  human  beings  who  were  left  upon  the 
earth,  and  the  horrid  yells  of  the  damned  spirits,  who  seemed 
to  have  been  driven  from  the  middle  air  by  the  cloud  which 
shut  down  its  impenetrable  veil  upon  the  world,  filled  my  soul 
with  horror  not  easily  described.  I  thought  myself  in  the 
dark  pit  of  hell,  which  I  had  often  made  a  ridicule  of  in  for- 
mer days.  But  soon  a  flash  of  lightning  showed  me  that  I 
was  still  on  earth,  and  then  a  peal  of  thunder,  which  shook  the 
globe  to  its  very  centre,  and  made  this  earth  to  tremble  like 
a  poplar  leaf;  while  flash  after  flash  of  vivid  lightning  made 
darkness  visible,  and  roar  after  roar  of  the  approaching  thun- 
der made  horror  still  more  horrible.  The  air,  if  air  it  could 
be  called,  became  impregnated  with  a  sulphureous  flame,  that 


A   SCENE   OF   THE  LAST   DAY.  409 

choked  the  lungs  of  man  and  beast,  and  seemed  to  hush  in 
silence  those  dismal  yells  and  moans  of  wretched  mortals  in 
this  wreck  of  matter.  I  asked  death  to  rid  my  suffering 
frame  from  torture  ;  but,  ah  !  death  now  denied  me  aid.  I 
now  remembered  all  the  warnings  of  my  former  days,  and 
these  enhanced  my  pain.  I  remembered,  too,  the  Scriptures, 
which  spoke  of  this  great  burning  day,  which  I  had  treated 
as  a  fiction  to  frighten  weak  and  silly  mortals.  I  saw,  and 
now  believed  —  but  0,  too  late  ! —  that  all  that  God  had 
promised  had  been,  was  now,  and  would  be,  literally  fulfilled. 
My  conscience  now  spoke  terror  to  my  soul.  I  now  began 
to  repent ;  but  0,  it  came  too  late  !  I  cried  for  mercy ; 
but  where  was  mercy  now  ?  When  last  the  heaven  was 
open,  and  I  had  seen  the  Judge  upon  his  throne,  Mercy  had 
veiled  herself;  and  when  the  immortal  band  had  left  the 
earth,  I  saw  her  leave  the  globe,  and  wing  her  way  up  to  the 
throne  of  God ;  and,  as  she  left  the  world,  I  heard  her  voice 
proclaim,  u  It  is  finished."  I  knew  her  work  was  done ;  and 
yet  my  tongue  cried  mercy  !  I  saw,  when  the  flash  of  light- 
nings gave  me  chance  to  see,  a  thousand  damned  forms  of 
demons,  grinning  out  horrible  delight,  I  heard,  between 
each  roar  of  thunder,  their  tauntings  and  horrible  impreca- 
tions. 

" '  The  heat  became  severe ;  combustibles  began  to  burn ; 
when  suddenly  the  heavens  began  to  rain  a  shower  of  hail- 
stones. I  fled  for  shelter  to  a  shelving  rock,  and  there 
secure  I  lay.  The  air  became  more  clear  and  cool.  I  now 
could  see  the  inhabitants  left  on  earth  flying  for  shelter  in 
every  direction  ;  some  wounded  by. the  hail,  and  with  their 
horrid  oaths  crying  for  help  to  their  more  fortunate  compan- 
ions. But  there  was  no  regard  for  others' woes — each 
one  sought  shelter  for  himself.  The  hail  increased,  until 
nothing  but  rocks  and  caverns  of  the  earth  could  stand  before 
it.  The  buildings,  temples,  and  proud  palaces  of  kings  were 
all  demolished,  and  lay  a  heap  of  ruins.  The  forest  trees 
and  groves  were  scattered  upon  the  plain ;  and  nothing  stood 
the  storm,  of  all  the  works  of  man.  The  face  of  the  earth 
was  covered  over  with  ice,  as  though  a  hundred  winters  had 
reigned  predominant.  The  eye  could  rest  on  nothing  but 
one  wide  waste  of  frozen  heaps  of  hail,  with  now  and  then  a 
solitary  human  being  wandering  among  the  ruins  of  the  once 


410  LIFE    OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

inhabited  cities,  half  chilled  to  death,  seeking  for  shelter,  or 
to  satisfy  a  craving  appetite,  cursing  and  blaspheming  the 
God  of  heaven  for  the  plague  of  the  hail. 

1  ' '  The  storm  had  ceased.  The  sun  had  appeared  behind  the 
broken  clouds,  far  in  the  west,  with  now  and  then  a  faint 
and  sickly  ray,  that  made  the  desolation  still  more  desolate. 
The  beasts  that  were  upon  the  face  of  the  earth  were  all 
slain,  except  a  few  who  had  burrowed  in  the  earth.  The 
fowls  of  the  heavens  were  scattered  over  the  earth  among  the 
slain ;  and  of  all  the  feathered  tribe  there  was  nothing  left 
but  scattered  carcasses.  Bodies  of  human  beings  were  under- 
neath the  ruins  in  every  place,  some  dashed  in  pieces,  some 
without  heads,  and  some  whose  limbs  were  severed  from  their 
trunks,  and  in  every  form  that  death  could  prey  upon  the 
human  frame.  Some,  still  in  life,  though  wounded,  filled 
up  the  dismal  scene  with  moans,  and  groans,  and  shrieks  of 
wild  despair. 

"  i  The  cloud,  which  but  recently  had  covered  the  earth  with 
darkness,  and  had  discharged  its  contents  of  massy  balls  of 
ice  upon  the  world,  now  rolled  its  broken  columns  to  the  east. 
The  sun  was  sinking  in  the  western  horizon,  as  if  it  hid  itself 
from  this  vast  desolation.  And  when  the  cloud  rolled  half 
way  down  the  eastern  sky,  there  opened  to  the  view  another 
sight, —  more  grand  there  could  not  be,—  a  city  !  Its  walls 
were  great  and  high.  The  foundation  appeared  to  be  the 
great  white  cloud,  on  which  the  throne  was  placed  when  first 
I  saw  the  light.  This  city  lay  four  square  upon  the  cloud. 
The  height,  the  length,  the  breadth  appeared  equal.  The 
walls  were  made  of  jasper,  more  pure  than  gold  that  is  seven 
times  purified.  It  shone  more  brilliant  than  crystal.  Twelve 
manner  of  precious  stones  garnished  the  wall.  Each  several 
stone  outshone  his  fellow ;  and  yet  the  polish  of  the  stone 
was  such  that  each  reflected  back  the  rays  his  fellow  gave, 
and,  thus  commingled,  formed  one  general  mass  of  rays  of 
light  and  glory,  increasing  with  every  reflection  twelve-fold, 
and  thus  increasing,  for  aught  that  I  can  tell,  to  infinity. 
Twelve  gates  I  saw  —  three  on  every  side.  These  gates 
were  made  of  pearls  ;  each  pearl  a  gate,  and  every  gate  a 
pearl  more  brilliant  than  a  sun.  All  the  streets  were  gold, 
so  highly  polished  that  they  shone  as  it  were  transparent 
glass.     I  saw  no  temple  there ;  but  I  beheld  such  glory  as 


A   SCENE   OF   THE   LAST   DAY.  411 

my  eyes  never  saw  before.  It  was  the  Great  I  Am,  Lord 
God  Almighty,  and  the  Lamb  of  God,  that  filled  the  city 
with  such  rays  of  light,  that  if  the  sun,  and  moon,  and  stars 
had  all  combined,  they  would  not  have  compared  with  it,  any 
more  than  the  small  glow-worm  could  with  the  sun  in  his 
meridian  glory.  I  wonder  how  I  did  behold  such  rays  of 
glory,  and  yet  they  dazzled  not.  But  yet,  I  now  bethink 
myself,  while  I  stood  gazing,  this  thought  was  whispered,  as 
I  imagined,  to  my  mind  — "  All  this  you  have  lost  for  your 
rejection  of  the  Lamb,  you  see,  the  light  of  yonder  city  !" 

"  '  At  this  my  soul  was  filled  with  horror,  and  madness 
seized  my  brain.  I  cried  to  the  rocks  to  hide  me  from  the 
view  of  him  whom  I  had  thus  rejected.  But  rocks  were 
deaf.  I  then  fled  to  the  mountains,  and  called  on  them  to 
fall  upon  me,  and  hide  me  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  or 
crush  me  into  non-existence.  But  mountains  had  no  pity 
on  a  wretch  like  me.  I  turned  my  eyes  away,  that  I  might 
not  behold  the  sight  again  ;  but  still  the  view  was  plain.  I 
shut  my  eyes,  determined  to  shut  out  this  hateful  vision ; 
but,  0,  the  form  was  printed  on  my  brain  in  lines  of  livid 
fire  !  Which  way  I  turned,  the  city  lay  before  me.  I  saw, 
or  thought  I  saw,  the  glory,  harmony,  and  happiness  of  the 
citizens ;  and  every  view  added  rancor,  enmity,  and  envy  to 
my  soul.  I  gnashed  my  teeth  with  pain;  I  raved  and 
roared  like  a  wild  maniac  ;  and  yet  my  reason  told  me  I  was 
sane, —  these  things  were  real.  I  cursed  and  swore, — 
blasphemed  the  God  of  heaven ;  yet  every  oath  returned 
upon  me,  and  was  like  a  dagger  piercing  to  my  heart.  I 
called  on  death  to  rid  me  of  my  pain ;  but  death  obeyed  not. 
I  thought  of  suicide,  to  rid  myself 'of  self ;  but  then  eternity 
—  0  dreadful  thought! — would  rush  upon  my  brain,  and 
fill  my  mind  with  horror  inconceivable.  I  tried  to  hope  that 
things  would  change,  or  use  would  reconcile  me  to  my  lot ; 
but  hope  had  fled,  and  this  I  saw  forever  !  No  hope  of 
change  for  better ;  for  all  that  hope  of  change  that  I  had  ever 
had,  I  treated  with  disdain, —  yea,  worse,  with  ridicule  and 
contempt.  I  saw  the  very  nature  of  the  holy  law  required 
my  banishment  forever.  And  all  the  time  of  probation 
which  I  had  formerly  enjoyed,  I  saw  was  on  this  express 
condition, —  to  be  prepared  to  meet  this  very  time,  wThen 
holiness  and  sin,  happiness  and  misery,  would  be  forever 


412  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

separated ;  when  he  that  is  filthy  would  be  filthy  still,  and 
he  that  is  holy  would  be  holy  still.  I  knew  that  God  him- 
self had  told  us  this ;  but  yet  I  listened  not.  Filled  with 
my  own  vain  thoughts  and  vainer  lusts,  I  trampled  on  the 
commands,  warnings,  and  invitations  of  the  GocT  of  heaven, 
—  and  here  end  all  my  hopes  !  Ah  !  could  I  hope  to  be 
happy,  on  the  condition  of  being  holy  too,  I  would  cast  it 
from  me ;  for  in  my  very  soul  I  abhor,  I  hate  the  very 
name  of  holiness.  I  should  be  willing  to  be  happy ;  but  to 
love  others  as  I  do  myself, — and  then  to  love  that  God 
supreme  above  all  others,  and  even  above  myself, —  I  will 
not,  cannot,  shall  not,  here  submit. 

K  '  While  my  mind  thus  passed  from  bad  to  worse,  and  every 
avenue  of  the  heart  was  filled  with  evil  passions,  I  saw  the 
city  still  drew  nearer  to  the  earth ;  and  from  its  rays  had 
poured  such  a  flood  of  light  and  heat  upon  the  earth,  that 
the  hail  melted,  and  the  streams  and  fountains  of  water 
dried  up.  The  tops  of  mountains  soon  began  to  burn ;  the 
rocks  began  to  melt,  and,  with  their  lava,  filled  up  the 
streams  and  vales  below.  This  was  not  like  the  former  heat 
which  I  had  recently  experienced  before  the  storm  of  hail  ; 
no  sulphureous  smell,  no  suffocating  heat,  like  that.  It  was 
a  flame  more  pure, — a  searching,  cleansing,  penetrating 
flame  of  fire, —  that  searched  in  every  nook  and  corner  of  the 
world,  and  pierced  the  very  bowels  of  the  globe ;  that  pene- 
trated every  crevice,  crack,  and  cavern  of  the  earth,  and 
then  descended  to  the  bottom  of  the  deep,  the  sea,  and  thus 
destroyed  all  that  had  life,  and  all  on  which  the  curse  of  sin 
was  found.  The  monuments  of  man,  that  long  had  stood 
the  shocks  of  ages,  now  mouldered  down  to  dust.  The 
works  of  art,  the  u  proud-cap  t  towers  and  gorgeous  palaces,'' 
and  all  the  modern  pageantry  of  pride  and  show,  were  by 
this  flame  to  ashes  turned.  The  cities,  villages,  and  towns, 
which  once  had  filled  the  world  with  human  beings,  and 
all  the  seats  of  science,  where  man  had  long  been  taught  the 
ancient  fables  and  the  vain  philosophy  of  the  former  genera- 
tions, and  also  learned  the  more  modern  customs  and 
fashions  of  the  day,  to  lord  it  over  others,  who  had  not  thus 
been  blessed,  as  they  supposed,  with  this  great  ray  of  light, 
this  mortal-cast,  man-made  wisdom, —  these  all  did  melt 
away,  and  not  an  eye  could  see  or  finger  point  where  onee 


A   SCENE   OF   THE   LAST   DAY.  413 

they  stood.  The  battlements  of  war, —  the  pride  of  kings, 
defence  of  nations,  and  the  boast  of  warriors, —  which  longer 
yet  had  stood  the  ravages  of  time,  and  now,  for  ages  back, 
had  claimed  the  name  and  title  which  mortals  give,  u  im- 
pregnable,"—  who,  from  their  gaping  sides,  had  poured  at 
times  such  showers  of  missiles  upon  the  approaching  foe, 
that  many  a  gallant  ship,  with  all  her  crew,  had  found  a 
berth  beneath  the  watery  wave,  or  scattered  in  fragments 
into  the  middle  air,  and  many  a  brave  and  fearless  hostile 
band  had  left  their  bones  to  whiten  on  the  plain; — these, 
too,  had  sunk  beneath  this  powerful  flame,  and  there  was 
not  a  fragment  left  to  tell  where  once  they  stood. 

c :  '  I  saw  the  cloisters  of  the  Roman  monks,  and  the  dark 
cells  of  the  nuns,  which  long  had  kept  from  view  the  secret 
crimes  and  midnight  revels  of  their  murderous,  cruel,  lustful 
inmates ;  —  I  saw  the  dark- walled  chamber  of  the  Inquisition, 
filled  with  its  means  of  torture,  that  had,  in  ages  past, 
drenched  all  its  walls  in  blood,  now  hung,  in  solemn 
mockery,  with  images  of  Christ,  with  likenesses  of  angels, 
and  pictures  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  blasphemously  called  "  the 
mother  of  God;"- — all  were  consumed  by  this  pervading 
flame.  I  then  beheld  it  approaching  where  I  stood.  My 
flesh  began  to  quiver  on  my  bones,  my  hair  rose  up  on  end, 
and  all  within  me  was  suddenly  turned  into  corruption.  I 
felt  the  flame  when  first  it  struck  my  person ;  it  seemed  to 
pierce  through  all  the  joints  and  marrow  of  my  frame, 
dividing  soul  and  body.  I  shrieked  with  pain,  and,  for  a 
moment,  I  was  all  unconscious.  The  next  moment  I  found 
myself  a  spirit,  and  saw  the  mass,  of  which  my  body  lately 
was  composed,  a  heap  of  ashes  ;  and,  although  my  spirit  yet 
retained  a  form  like  that  which  I  had  dropped,  yet  half  the 
pain  was  gone,  and  a  moment  I  seemed  to  live  again  for 
pleasure.  But  the  next  moment,  turning  from  the  loath- 
some lump  of  ashes,  I  saw  the  flame,  and  in  it  saw  the  form 
of  the  Most  Holy.  I  fled  as  on  the  wings  of  the  wind,  and 
skimmed  the  surface  of  the  earth,  if  possible  to  escape  the 
sight  of  that  All-seeing  Eye  ;  and,  as  I  flew,  I  soon  found 
many  thousands  more  unhappy  spirits  like  myself,  seeking 
for  the  same  object.  We  fled  together,  and  every  moment 
added  to  our  numbers  scores  of  these  unhappy  beings  ;  but 
still  the  same  most  holy  flame  pursued,  until  we  found  no 


414  LIFE    OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

place  on  earth  could  hide  us  from  his  view.  We  then 
launched  forth  into  the  lower  air.  and  sunk,  and  sunk,  and 
sunk,  until  we  came  to  this  dark  gulf ;  and  here  we  found 
this  pit,  where  light  can  never  enter  :  and,  glad  to  find  a 
place  where  holiness  will  never  enter,  we  plunged  in  here. 
And  when  we  left  the  light,  and  sunk  into  this  dark  and 
dismal  place  of  wretchedness  and  woe,  we  found  ourselves 
enclosed  on  every  side  in  chains  of  darkness,  that  all  the 
demons  and  spirits  of  the  damned  can  never  break,  until  He 
who  shut  us  up  will  please  to  let  us  loose  again.  And  then 
we  know  there  is  another  place,  which  lies  far  beneath  this 
dark  and  dismal  pit,  that,  if  he  conquers  then,  will  be  our 
last  abode, —  a  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone.'  /,j 


"  A  VISION    OF   DEATH. 

u  I  saw, —  whether  asleep  or  awake,  I  cannot  tell,  but 
this  I  know:  I  saw  the  dark  and  dismal  door  of  Death.  It 
was  narrow  as  the  grave ;  and  only  one  could  enter  at  a 
time,  and  tread  its  winding  steep.  Yet  thousands  passed 
the  door.  At  its  threshold,  all  left  their  earthly  idols. 
Some  cast  a  wishful  look,  as  they  pushed  forward,  and 
shrieked.  Some  lingered  trembling,  and  some  rushed  for- 
ward regardless  of  the  consequences.  There  were  seen  all 
ages,  all  ranks,  and  all  conditions,  passing  towards  the 
door. 

"  I  saw  the  drunkard  quaff  his  bowl  of  poison,  burst  open 
the  door  of  death,  and  stagger  in.  I  heard  a  curse,  a  groan, 
a  fall,  a  hollow,  dismal  sound,  and  all  was  silent  as  the 
tomb. 

"  Next  came  a  voluptuary.  He  laughed  he  danced,  and 
leaped  the  fearful  leap.  The  door  closed  on  him.  I  heard 
a  trembling  cry.  Spectators  shuddered  and  turned  their 
eyes  away,  and  nothing  more  was  seen. 

"  A  selfish  miser  came,  loaded  down  with  bags  of  gold. 
His  head  was  white  with  care.  His  look  was  fearful  with 
despair.  Envy  was  his  only  attendant.  He  staggered  to 
the  door,  laid  down  his  gold,  and  wept.     A  dismal  cloud 


ON   JEREMIAH'S   LAMENTATION.  415 

enveloped  him.  A  laugh  was  heard.  And,  when  the  cloud 
was  gone,  gold,  miser, —  all  had  disappeared. 

11  There  came  a  man  of  honor.  On  his  brow  wreaths  of 
victory  were  twined.  His  step  was  stately.  At  his  nod 
many  bowed  and  fawned.  He,  too,  must  pass  the  gate.  He 
touched  the  secret  spring.  The  door  wide  open  flew.  Dark- 
ness enveloped  him.  The  multitude  shrank  back,  to  follow 
some  other  leader.  And  nothing  now  was  seen,  save  a  few 
dried  leaves  of  laurel. 

"  There  came  a  giddy  youth.  His  eye  was  sparkling. 
His  step  was  light.  Many  a  jocund  story  hung  upon  his 
lips.  While  looking  on  the  world,  he  backward  ran  against 
the  door,  and  fell.  I  heard  a  piteous  moan,  a  distant  shriek, 
and  silence  reigned  again. 

"  I  saw  one  other  come.  Hope  sat  upon  his  brow.  He 
smiled  and  wept ;  but,  with  a  forward  look,  he  traced  the 
path,  while  in  his  hand  he  held  a  little  Book,  and  often  read. 
I  saw  he  had  a  glass  that  penetrated  the  dark  abyss,  and 
left  a  ray  behind.  I  heard  him  sing.  *T  was  not  a  song  of 
earth,  but  soft  and  sweet  like  the  melodious  sounds  of  dis- 
tant music  on  a  summer's  eve.  He  passed  the  door  of  death; 
and,  like  the  setting  sun,  whose  rays  have  chased  the  flying 
clouds  away,  he  passed  to  rise  more  glorious  on  the  morrow." 


"  ON   JEREMIAH'S   LAMENTATION. 

:  How  doth  the  City,  once  so  full  of  fame, 
Now  silent  sit  and  mourn  her  widowed  name  ! 
She,  that  was  great  among  the  nations  far, 
When  kings  and  princes  brought  their  gold  to  her  ! 
She  weepeth  sore.     The  midnight  hears  her  moan  — 
Her  tears  fast  flowing,  as  she  sits  alone. 
Her  friends  are  foes.     To  fill  her  general  doom, 
Her  lovers,  children,  sink  into  the  tomb. 
Judah  afflicted  is,  a  slave  of  old  ; 
She  's  gone  a  captive,  —  to  a  servant  sold. 
Her  people,  scattered  through  a  heathen  land, 
No  rescue  have  they  from  the  spoiler's  hand. 
0  Zion  !  mourn  thy  state,  because  there  's  none 
To  spread  thy  feasts,  or  call  thy  children  home. 
Thy  temple  's  empty  ;  all  thy  teachers  sigh 
In  bitterness,  to  hear  thy  maidens  cry  : 

36 


416  LIFE    OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

*■  The  Lord  Jehovah  hath  this  wonder  wrought , 

For  her  transgressions  are  these  judgments  brought  * 

Zion's  fair  daughters,  all  their  beauty  fled  ! 
Her  princes  fallen  !  all  her  heroes  dead  ! 
Jerusalem  once  great,  how  changed  the  scene  ! 
Her  sorrows  double,  make  her  anguish  keen, 
When  recollection  calls  her  mercies  o'er,  — 
The  pleasant  things  she  had  in  days  of  yore. 
Her  foes  approach ;  her  people  all  are  slain  ; 
She  cries  for  help,  —  alas  !  she  cries  in  vain. 
Behold  the  envious  !  how  he  taunting  says  : 

*  Where  are  your  Sabbaths  and  your  solemn  days  ?  ' 
The  nations  that  have  known  and  heard  her  fame 
Despise  her  now  and  publish  all  her  shame. 

Her  downcast  look,  her  end,  her  bitter  sigh, 
Are  not  regarded.     No  Deliverer 's  nigh. 

Behold,  0  Lord,  how  her  afflictions  grow  ! 
Her  enemies  have  magnified  them  too. 
There  walk  the  plunderer's  and  the  murderer's  band, 
No  place  so  sacred  can  their  rage  command. 
Her  people  sigh  for  bread ;  they  seek  in  vain 
Their  pleasant  things  for  meat.     They  cry  again  : 

*  Look  down,  0  Lord  !  consider  all  my  ways  ; 
How  vile  am  I,  how  sinful  all  my  days  ! 

Ah  !  what  is  that  to  you  who  pass  me  by  ? 

Does  any  sorrow  with  my  sorrow  vie  ? 

The  Lord  in  judgment  hath  afflicted  me  ; 

From  his  fierce  anger  whither  shall  I  flee  ? 

In  every  path  my  feet  have  found  a  snare. 

If  I  return,  it 's  desolation  there. 

And  my  transgression,  like  a  yoke,  is  bound 

Upon  my  neck.     My  crimes  are  twisted  round. 

My  strength  is  weakness.     Lord,  how  can  I  rise, 

Delivered  over  to  my  sins  a  prize  ? 

The  Lord  hath  trodden,  by  a  mighty  host, 

My  old  and  young  men,  humbled  in  the  dust. 

For  these  I  weep ;  my  tears  are  streaming  fast ; 

No  comfort  near,  nor  desolation  past. 

In  vain  I  spread  my  hands  ;  for  there  is  none 

To  comfort  me  or  bring  my  children  home. 

The  Lord  commands  ;  in  terror  I  am  bound, 

And  all  my  foes  encompass  me  around. 

0  righteous  Sovereign  !  lo,  how  just  thy  cause  ! 
For  I  've  rebelled  and  trampled  on  thy  laws. 
Hear,  all  ye  people,  and  my  woes  behold  ; 

My  virgins  captured,  and  my  young  men  sold. 

1  call  my  lovers,  once  my  hope  and  pride  ; 
But  they  despise  me,  and  my  sighs  deride. 

My  priests  and  elders,  while  they  seek  for  bread, 
Give  up  the  ghost,  and  slumber  with  the  dead. 
Behold,  0  Lord,  in  me  is  sore  distress, 
My  heart  is  troubled,  and  I  find  no  rest ; 


APOLOGY  FOU  TIMF8  FLEETXES3.        417 

Abroad  the  sword,  at  home  is  naught  but  death, 
I  sigh,  a  rebel,  with  my  every  breath. 
There  's  none  to  comfort,  though  they  hear  me  sigh  * 
M  The  Lord  has  done  it  all,"  they  gladly  cry. 

Behold  the  day  the  Lord  has  called  his  own, 
When  they,  like  me,  shall  come  before  his  throne. 
There  all  their  sins  and  wickedness  shall  be, 
And  do  to  them  as  Thou  hast  done  to  me. 

For  my  transgressions  and  my  soul's  complaint 
My  sighs  are  many,  and  my  heart  is  faint.5  " 


ON   TIME. 


Si  Yor  ask  me,  sir,  to  tell  the  cause 
Why  nature  changes  in  her  laws  ; 
And  why,  in  youth,  time  lags  so  slow, 
But  flies  so  swift  as  old  we  grow. 

"  I  '11  tell  thee,  friend.     Lay  not  the  blame, 
Nor  call  old  time  '  a  fickle  dame.' 
She  heeds  you  not,  nor  will  she  stay, 
To  stop  your  progress  or  decay, 

"  When  you  were  young,  like  other  boys, 
You  sought  anticipated  joys  ; 
And  when  for  future  years  you  pined, 
You  thought  not  of  those  left  behind. 

"  l'ou  watched  for  years,  for  weeks,  and  days 
To  come,  to  bring  your  wished-for  plays  ; 
And,  with  our  future  good  in  view, 
Time  lags  behind  to  me  and  you. 

"  We  measure  not  by  ranning  sands, 
Nor  by  the  clock's  revolving  hands  ; 
But  think  old  time  must  run  and  fly, 
To  bring  our  wished-for  objects  nigh. 

"  But,  when  we  to  the  object  come, 
We  think  old  time  must  cease  to  run, 
And  be  obedient  to  our  need  : 
To  walk  or  fly,  as  we  shall  speed. 

"  So  the  vain  youth,  to  imitate 
Follies  and  vices  of  the  great, 
Longs  for  the  day  of  liberty, 
When  he  from  guardians  may  be  free. 


418  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM   MILLER. 

"  Old  time  revolves  at  slowest  pace 
"When  we  're  most  eager  for  the  race. 
In  youth  or  age,  in  hope  or  fear, 
He  walks  or  runs,  till  death  draws  near." 


A   FRAGMENT.  —  AX   ALLEGORY. 

"  There  was  a  certain  prince  of  royal  blood.  His  father 
was  one  of  the  most  powerful  monarchs  in  the  world,  and 
every  way  qualified  to  rule  over  the  people  of  his  inheritance. 
He  hid  fair  not  only  to  rule  in  justice  and  equity,  but  to 
exalt  his  subjects  to  an  honorable  station  and  to  great  glory. 

"  This  prince,  whose  name  we  shall  call  Emanor.  was 
brought  up  at  his  Father's  court,  where  he  was  taught  all 
the  principles  of  truth  and  righteousness.  He  was  early 
taught  to  learn  obedience  to  his  Father's  will ;  and  was  never 
known  to  be  disobedient  to  a  single  command,  or  to  break 
one  of  those  righteous  principles  by  which  his  Father's  sub- 
jects were  governed.  Emanor  learnt  the  first  great  lesson, 
self-command,  which  only  can  teach  men  to  command  others. 
He  suffered  much,  that  he  might  have  pity  on  those  who 
suffered.  He  was  tempted  often  by  foreign  courtiers,  who 
visited  his  Father's  court,  to  follow  the  vanities  and  follies 
of  other  courts  :  but  was  always  able  to  resist  the  tempta- 
tion, and  expose  their  false  reasoning  to  their  own  shame 
and  confusion.  He  was,  therefore,  able  to  succor  others  that 
were  tempted.  He  lived  on  the  most  simple  fare,  was  frugal 
and  plain  in  his  dress,  and  economical  in  his  expenses,  that 
he  might  make  the  poor  richer.  He  was  affable  and  free  in 
his  manners,  that  he  might  encourage  the  poor  and  needy, 
the  weak  and  afflicted,  to  apply  to  him  for  succor  or  help. 
He  was  meek  and  humble  in  his  intercourse  with  his  fellow- 
men,  that,  by  his  practice,  he  might  teach  others  those  vir- 
tues which  were  greatly  admired  and  rewarded  at  his  Father's 
court. 

"  We  must  not  forget  to  mention  that  Emanor  was  pious. 
His  was  not  that  ostentatious  piety  which  says.  ;  Stand  by 
thyself — •  I  am  more  holy  than  thou  ;'  nor  that  sectarian 
piety  which  denounces  all  that  will  not  i  follow  us.;     No,  my 


AN   ALLEGORY.  419 

kind  reader,  he  had  not  that  dogmatical  piety  which  lords  it 
over  fellow- worshippers,  and  says,  '  This  you  must  do,  and 
that  you  may  leave  undone  ;  you  must  support  this  improve- 
ment, that  institution,  or  join  such  a  social  compact,  or  we 
can  have  no  fellowship  with  you  as  Christians.  You  must 
forbear  to  eat  or  drink  any  of  the  good  things  of  life,  if  your 
masters  say  forbear.'  Neither  had  he  that  proud,  scholastic 
piety,  which  knows  no  greater  depths  than  the  wisdom  of 
man,  supported  by  vain  philosophy,  and  has  no  higher 
motive  than  self-aggrandizement  at  the  expense  of  others. 
No,  his  piety  was  that  of  the  heart,  founded  on  the  first 
grand  principle  of  his  Father's  kingdom,  namely,  to  'love  God 
with  all  the  heart,  and  our  neighbor  as  ourselves.'  It  man- 
ifested itself  in  his  constant,  daily  submission  to  the  commands 
and  dealings  of  God,  and  in  diligently  inquiring  after  and 
relieving  the  wants  of  his  fellow-creatures.  l  He  went  about 
doing  good.'  No  ostentation,  no  self-aggrandizement  was  in 
his  religion,  but  a  pure,  holy  flame  of  love  to  God  and  man. 
His  person  was  perfect,  his  form  comely,  his  soul  pure.  This 
was  the  character,  and  such  the  qualifications  of  Emanor, 
the  Prince  of  whom  I  have  been  speaking. 

"  In  addition  to  what  I  have  related,  he  was  a  great  Cap- 
tain, a  mighty  Conqueror,  and  a  Prince  of  peace.  In  the 
wars  which  his  Father  waged  with  the  most  potent  enemies 
of  his  government,  he  came  off  conqueror,  and  more  than 
conqueror,  over  some  of  the  most  stubborn  and  rebellious 
subjects  that  any  government  was  ever  troubled  with.  He 
carried  the  olive  branch  of  peace  into  the  enemies'  camp ; 
and,  although  he  was  treated  with  indignity,  scorn,  and 
hatred,  was  reviled,  mocked,  spit  upon,  was  smitten,  bruised', 
wounded,  and  torn,  slandered,  defamed,  and  cast  out,  yet  he 
deased  not  to  cry,  Peace,  and  to  proclaim,  Pardon  to  the 
chief  of  the  rebels,  on  condition  of  their  throwing  down  the 
weapons  of  their  rebellion,  and  returning  to  the  allegiance 
of  their  lawful  and  righteous  Sovereign.  And,  when  they 
refused  even  these  conditions,  he  bought  them  of  his  Father, 
paid  the  utmost  farthing  for  their  release,  and  then  followed 
them,  day  after  day,  with  kind  invitations,  with  soft  words, 
and  great  and  rich  promises,  until  his  own  spirit  was  kindled 
in  their  hearts,  and  they  yielded  to  the  '  power  of  his  word ;' 
for  c  never  did  man  speak  as  he  spake.'  And  then  he 
36* 


420  LIFE    OF   WILLIAM   MILLER. 

adopted  them  as  joint  heirs  with  himself  in  his  Father  § 
kingdom.  This,  surely,  you  will  say,  is  more  than  being 
conqueror.  He  not  only  destroyed  their  weapons  of  warfare 
and  humbled  their  proud  hearts,  but  he  destroyed  the  enmity 
of  their  minds,  and  made  them  willing  and  obedient  subjects 
to  his  Father's  government.  He  produced  in  their  very 
souls  a  hungering  and  thirsting  after  the  constitution  and 
laws  of  the  kingdom  which  they  had  formerly  attempted  in 
vain  to  destroy.  He  likewise,  by  his  power,  goodness,  and 
love,  begot  in  each  of  these  rebels  a  spirit  of  emulation  to  be 
like  their  young  Prince,  to  think  like  him  of  his  Father's 
glory,  to  act  like  him.  to  •  do  to  others  as  they  would  have 
others  do  to  them/'  and  to  be  like  him. —  perfect  in  all  their 
ways,  as  the  King  himself  was  perfect.  Their  chief  object 
was  to  glorify  their  beloved  Prince,  by  obedience  to  his  laws 
and  requirements,  as  he  glorified  his  Father,  and  obeyed  his 
laws  and  requests. 

"  Here  the  reader  must  acknowledge  that  we  have  a  pat- 
tern worthy  of  all  love,  imitation,  and  adoration.  All  ra- 
tional minds  must  admit  that  it  could  not  be  properly  called 
idolatry  to  adore  and  worship  so  perfect,  powerful,  and  ex- 
cellent a  Beincr  as  this.  And  these  rebels  were  in  the  habit 
of  calling  him  their  •  Master.5  *  Saviour."  •'  Creator.'"  '  Lord 
God.'  •  the  Holy  One,"  l  the  First  and  the  Last,'  l  the  only 
true  God.'  &c.  The  unreconciled  rebels  complained  loudly 
and  bitterly  of  those  who  were  reconciled,  for  their  idolatry 
and  submission  to  the  dear  Prince  in  whom  they  had  received 
such  innumerable  blessings:  but  this  complaint  only  went  to 
prove  the  unreconciled  state  of  heart  which  they  possessed 
against  this  Prince  of  princes.  It  has  always  been  noticed 
that,  when  any  of  these  complainers  have  been  truly  humbled 
and  reconciled  to  this  Prince  and  his  Father's  government, 
they  have  become  idolators  equally  with  their  brethren,  and 
have  acknowledged  him  a  God  in  human  form. 

"  The  King,  the  Father  of  Emanor,  having  designed  to 
procure  a  bride  for  the  Prince,  his  son,  made  a  general  proc- 
lamation in  his  empire,  and  sent  forth  a  herald  to  publish 
even  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  this  his  design,  and  fixing  to 
his  decree  some  of  the  following  conditions  : 

"  1st.  The  damsel  who  would  aspire  to  this  great  honor 
must  believe  in  this  proclamation,  and  place  implicit  confi- 


THE   DAY    OF   THE   LORD.  421 

dence  in  the  word,  power,  and  goodness  of  the  Prince ;  her 
faith  must  be  tried  by  all  the  means  the  wisdom  of  the 
Prince  could  devise,  to  know  whether  it  was  pure  and  would 
endure  to  the  end ;  and  this  was  to  be  known  by  her  obedi- 
ence to  the  commands  of  her  Lord  and  Prince."    .... 

This  sketch  is,  of  course,  incomplete.  It  is  a  subject  of 
regret  that  he  did  not  proceed  to  describe  the  trials  of  the 
church,  the  manner  in  which  God  led  her,  to  prove  her  and 
try  her,  and  fit  her  for  the  exalted  position  to  which  she  is 
destined,  when  she  shall  be  presented  to  the  Father,  without 
spot  or  blemish,  at  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb. 


"  c  Ye,  brethren,  are  not  in  darkness  that  that  Day  should  overtake 
you  as  a  thief.  Ye  are  all  the  children  of  light,  and  the  children  of  the 
day  :  we  are  not  of  the  night,  nor  of  the  darkness.'  —  1  Thess.  5  :  4,  5. 

"  This  passage  of  Scripture  is  one  of  many  that  come  to 
us  in  this  time  of  trial  with  a  blessed  promise  that,  if  we  are 
what  we  should  be,  we  shall  know  something  respecting  the 
coming  of  the  day  of  the  Lord. 

"  Many  tell  us  it  is  no  matter  whether  we  know  anything 
on  this  subject,  and  that,  if  we  remain  in  ignorance  of  it,  we 
shall  be  safe.  But  the  apostle,  in  the  context,  shows  us  the 
consequences  of  that  day  coming  on  us  as  a  thief:  'For  your- 
selves know  perfectly,  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  so  cometh  as 
a  thief  in  the  night.  For  when  they  shall  say,  Peace  and 
safety :  then  sudden  destruction  cometh  upon  them,  as  trav- 
ail upon  a  woman  with  child  :  and  they  shall  not  escape.' 

* {  He  cannot  mean  by  this  that  that  day  will  steal  in  upon 
us,  and  we  not  be  looking  for  it.  It  is  only  those  who 
say,  Peace  and  safety, —  who  say  the  day  is  not  coming, — 
who  are  thus  overtaken,  as  a  thief  comes  unawares  and  spoils 
his  neighbor  of  his  goods. 

"  How  blessed  the  thought  —  the  Day  of  To-morrow  ! 
When  Glory's  bright  Sun  shall  banish  all  sorrow  ; 
When  the  trials  of  life  shall  be  oyer  ;  and  never 
Draw  us  from  our  love,  for  ever  and  ever. 


422  LIFE   OF  WILLIAM  MILLER. 

"  I  long  for  the  day  !     The  night  has  been  dreary. 
To  tarry  and  pray,  the  flesh  becomes  weary. 
I  long  for  the  voice,  God's  servants  awaking, 
That  soon  shall  announce  that  that  day  is  breaking. 

"0,  then  shall  our  eyes  refrain  from  all  weeping, 
And  our  eyelids  no  more  shall  be  heavy  with  sleeping, 
When  death  is  disarmed  of  his  trident  of  terror, 
And  sin  has  no  charms  for  ever  and  ever. 

"  Let  weary  ones  sing  !     How  can  they  be  fearful  ? 
Since  Christ  is  our  King,  our  hearts  will  be  cheerful 
I  long  for  the  day,  'mid  this  wreck  of  commotion, 
To  land  me  safe  home  in  eternity's  ocean." 


INDEX. 


.  340,  157, 


Ancestry  of  Mr.  Miller,  .  . 
Appointed  sheriff,  .... 
Acrostic,  by  himself,  .  .  . 
Articles  in  the  Telegraph, 
Addison,  lectures  in,  .  . 
Andover,  Tt.,  lectures  in, 

Andover,  Mass.,    "      "      

Address  to  believers, 

Antediluvian  dialogue, 

Appeal  to  the  sinner, 

Andover,  N.  H.,  lectures  in,    ...    . 
Address  to  believers  in  Christ  of  all 

denominations, 

Akron,  0.,  lectures  in, 

Address  of  L.  H.  Conference,  .    .    .    . 

Albany,  lectures  at, 

Albany  Conference, 

Associated  action, 

Address  of  the  Albany  Conference,   . 

Apology  and  defence, 

Address  to  the  public, 

Apostrophe  to  the  Pope, 

A  fragment  —  an  allegory, 


1 

22 

91 

99 

119 

126 

.  154 

.  172 

.  210 

.214 

.  229 

.  250 
.  264 
.283 
.  300 
.  300 
.  304 
.  309 
.  326 
.  350 


.418 


Battle  of  Plattsburg, 45 

Builds, 63 

Ball  at  Fairhaven, 66 

Beekmantown,  lectures  in, 115 

Bridport,  "        " 120 

Bolton,  C.  E.,        "        "     .    .  150,  122,  132 
Bristol,  "        "     .    .    .    .  124,  340 

Boston  Investigator,  testimony  in  the    .  127 

Benson,  lectures  in, 160,  130,  151 

Braintree,  Tt.,  lectures  in, 132 

Brookfield,  "        u 132 

Bethel,  Tt.,  "        " 133 

Braintree,  Mass.,  "        " 135 

Boston,  lectures  in,  .  139,  141,  144,  154,  156, 
158,  163.  229,  248,  324,  349,  358 

Barry,  T.  P.,    .    .    .  '.    . 143  | 

Burlington.  Vt.,  lectures  in,  .  152,  341,  353  ' 
Ballston  Spa,  '  "  "  .  .  .  .  154, 157  | 
Boston  Post,  statement  in  the,     ....  164  ' 


Brandon,  lectures  in, 167 

Bennington,  Tt.,  lectures  in, 178 

Ballston  Centre,        "        " 227 

Buffalo,  "        "  .    .    .   .  247, 264 

Baltimore,  "        " 254 

Brooklyn,  X.  Y.,       "        " 254 

Burning  day, 256 

Bible  societies, 222 

Basin  Harbor, 358 

Creed  of  Mr.  M., 77 

Commencement  of  public  labors,    ...    97 
Conversation  on  a  Hudson  River  boat,  .  106 

Cornwall, 118,  119 

Certificate  of  ministers, 121 

Cambridge,  Tt.,  lectures  in,    .  122,  138,  353 
Colchester,  "        "  .    .    .    .  138, 151 

Christian  Herald,  testimony  in  the,   .    .  142 
Claremont,  N.  H.,  lectures  in,     .    .  158,  229 

Cambridgeport,  "        " 158 

Christian  Secretary,  from  the,     ....  162 
Christian  Reflector,  letter  in  the,    .    .   .  164 

Chicopee,  camp-meeting, 167 

Castine,  Me.,  lectures  in, 167 

Countryman,  remarks  in  the,  .....  184 

Criticism,  his  views  of,     . 207 

Church,  not  in  the  wilderness,     ....  213 
Church,  under  various  circumstances,  .  217 

Concord,  X.  H.,  lectures  in, 229 

Confession  of  Mr.  M., 262 

Cleaveland,  O.,  lectures  in, 264 

Cincinnati,  O.,        "        " 264 

Champlain,  "        " 326 

Cr anbury  Creek,  X.  Y., 349 

Difficulties  and  objections,    ......    81 

Dream, 85,  361 

Doctor,  conversation  with, 95 

Dresden,  lectures  in,  .  98,  109,  123,  126,  151 

Derby,  Tt.,  «        " 122,  354 

Danby,  Tt.,  "        " 126 

Dover,  X.  H.,  lectures  in, 159 

Death  of  his  mother, 123 


424 


INDEX. 


Derry  camp-meeting,  article  on,  ...   .  273 

Disconnection  of  the  church  in  Low 
Hampton  from  the  Baptist  de- 
nomination,      288 

Declaration  of  principles  by  the  Albany 
Conference, 301 

Definiteness  of  prophetic  time,   ....  329 

Early  life  of  Mir.  Miller, 10 

Eden,  Yt.,  lectures  in, 122 

Essex,  Yt.,      "        " 133,  353 

East  Randolph,  Mass.,  lectures  in,  .  .  .  135 
Exeter,  N.  H.,  "         "  .  139,  143 

East  Kingston  camp-meeting, 164 

Extracts  from  a  discourse  on  Hosea  6  : 

1—3 218 

Extract  from  a  discourse  on  the  parable 

of  ten  virgins, 220 

Exeter  camp-meeting, 229 

Explosion  on  board  the  Princeton,  .  .  .  253 
Easy  mode  of  converting  the  world,  .  .  286 
Erroneous  views, 330 

Forks,  lectures  at  the, 112,  115 

Fort  Ann,  lectures  in, 124,  154 

Fairhaven,  Yt.,  lectures  in, 127 

Fairhaven,  Mass.,  "         " 156 

Fonda  Bush,  "        " 159 

Franklin,  N.  H.,      "        " 229 

Fanaticism,  its  origin, 229 

Fanaticism  repudiated  by  Mr.  M.,  .    .    .  235 

Faith,  the  value  of  (poetry), 341 

Fairfield,  Yt., 354 

Ferrisburg,  Yt., 358 

Gambling, 61 

George ville,  C.  E.,  lectures  in,  .  .  122,  150 
Granville,  "        "...  120,  167 

Gaysville,  Yt.,  "        " 133 

Groton,  Mass.,  "        "...  137,  138 

Green,  C,  testimony  of, 151 

Galway,  lectures  in, 157 

Gazette  and  Advertiser,  remarks  in  the,  227 
Gilmanton,  N.  H.,  lectures  in,     ....  229 

"Glad  Tidings," 247 

Georgas'  vision, 276 

Glen's  Falls, 349 

Hampton,  lectures  in, 118 

Hutting,  C.  E.,  lectures  in, 122 

Haverhill,  Mass.,     "        " 139 

Himes,  J.  Y.,  his  first  acquaintance  with 

Mr.  M., 139 

Hatley,  C.  E.,  lectures  in, 150 

Hervey,  N.,  testimony  of, 155 

Hartford,  N.  Y.,  lectures  in, 157 

Hartford,  Conn.,      "        "  .    .    .    .  162,  340 

Hoax  at  Washington, 177 

Half  Moon,  lectures  in, 227 

Home  of  Mr.  Miller, 243 

Harrisburg,  Pa.,  lectures  in, 268 

Imbibes  infidel  sentiments, 25 

Ironical  letter  to  his  wife, 56 

Jay,  lectures  in, 112 

Jericho,  "        " 122,  133 

Jamesville,  lectures  in, 159 

Keeseville,  lectures  in,  .   .  104, 112, 115, 126 


Keene,  N.  H.,  lectures  in 112 

Letters  to  his  wife,     .....  39,  42, 49,  56 

Letter  to  Judge* Stanley 47 

Letters  to  his  sister 83,  102,  109 

Letter  of  Elder  Hendryx, 93 

Letters  to    "  "  100,  104,  106,  110, 

111,  112,  115,  118,  119,  120,  123,  125 

Low  Hampton,  removal  to, 63 

License  to  preach, 108 

Lower  Canada,  lectures  in, 122 

Lowell,  Yt.,  "        " 122 

Lansingburg,  N.  Y.,  lectures  in,  .    125, 127, 
227,  349 

Lawrence,  N.  Y.,  lectures  in, 126 

Ludlow,  Yt.,  "        "...  126,  127 

Low  Hampton,  "        "  .  128,  151,  158 

Letter  from  Rev.  C.  Fitch, 128 

Letter    "    Rev.  F.  S.  Parke,  .   .    .  130,  131 
Letter    "    Rev.  E.  Andrews,     ....  131 

Letter    "    Rev.  J.  Claflin, 132 

Letter  to  his  son, 132 

Letter  from  Montpelier, 133 

Letter     "    S.  Mann, 135 

Lowell.  Mass.,  incident  and  lectures  at,  135, 

136,  138,  157 

Lynn  Record,  testimony  in  the,  ....  137 

Lynn,  lectures  in, 137 

Letter  from  S.  Hawley,  .    .  • 138 

Littleton,  Mass.,  lectures  in, 141 

Lockport,  N.  Y.,     "         "  .    .    .    .  247,  2G4 

Lewiston,  N.  Y.,      "         " 247 

Lines  respecting  his  disappointment,     .  262 

Litch.  J.,  letter  from, 263 

Letters  to  Mr.  Himes,    ....  268,  270,  277 

Letter  to  I.  E.  Jones, 280 

Letter  to  H.  Buckley, 354 

Lines  to  William  Miller, 364 

Lines  on  the  death  of  William  Miller,   .  381 

Loss  of  sight,  ....    • 366 

Letters  from  Elder  D.  I.  Robinson,  143,  374 

Letter      "    Elder  Kimball, 374 

Letter  of  condolence  to  surviving 
friends, 380 

Miller  farm, 1 

Marriaee  of  Mr.  M., 15 

Military  life, 31 

Manner  of  his  study  of  the  Bible,  ...    69 

Ministers,  his  idea  of  one, 105 

Middletown.  X.  Y.,  lectures  in,  120,  124,  349 

Middlebury;  Yt,,  "        " 122 

Monkton,  X.  Y.,  "        " 125 

Massena,  "        " 126 

Mount  Holly,  Yt.,         "         " 126 

Moriah,  Yt.,  "        " 127 

Montpelier,  Yt.,  "        " 132 

Medbury,  Rev.  R,  B.,  testimony  of,    .    .  145 
Maine  Wesleyan  Journal,  "  "     .    .  148 

Medford,  Mass.,  lectures  in, 160 

Miller,  Mr.,  and  the  phrenologist,  .    .    .  160 
Miller  and  the  Congregational  minister,  175 

Miller  and  the  infidels, 175 

Miller  and  his  reviewers, 185 

Millennial  Harbinger,  article  in  the,  .    .  239 

Missionary  societies, 222 

McConnellsville,  O.,  lectures  in,  .    .    .    .264 
Marietta,  O.,  "        "   ....  264 

Methodist  ministers  and  Mr.  M.,    ...  264 
Middlesex  Standard,  article  from,  .   .   .273 


IXDEX. 


425 


Minority  report  of  Council  at  Low  Hamp- 
ton,     281 

Middletown,  Ct., 340 

Morrioiown,  Yt., 340  j 

Montgomery,  Yt., 353 


Newhaven,  Yt.,  lectures  in,  .  .  . 
Nortb  Springfield,  "  "  .  .  .  . 
Now  York,  lectures  in,  .  150,  163, 
249,  254. 
New  Bedford,  Mass.,  lectures  in,  , 
Nashua,  N.  II.,  "         "  .    . 

Newark,  N.  J.,  "         "  .    . 

Northampton,  "         "  .    , 

Newark,  tent-meeting  in,  .... 
Newburyport,  Mass.,  lectures  in, 
New  Haven,  Ct.,  "         tt .   , 

Newington,  Ct., 

North  Scituate,  R.  I., 

North  Attleboro',  Mass.,  .... 
Nonessential  doctrines, 


.  .  .  125 
126,  229 
167,  169, 
,  268,  349 
,  .  .  156 
15S,  160 
163,  254 
.  .  .  167 
.  .  .  167 
.  .  .  163 
,  .  .  163 
.  .  .  340 
.  .  .349 
.  .  .349 
.    .    .359 


Ode  to  Independence 20 

Orwell,  lectures  in,    .    .    .  118,  122,  124,  126 

Outlet,  C.  E.,  lectures  in, 132 

Objections  to  the  Albany  Conference  con- 
sidered,      314 

On  Jeremiah's  lamentation, 415 

On  time, 417 

Pittsfield,  Mass.,  early  residence  of  the 

Miller  family, 1 

Pittsfield,  Mass.,  lectm-es  in, 

Plattsburg,  "        " 115 

Plattsburg,  battle  of, 45 

Profanity, 61,  65 

Poultney,  lectures  in,  .  99,  104, 110, 124. 126 

Pawlet,  "         " 99,  118 

Publication  of  his  pamphlet, 106 

Putnam,  lectures  in, 110 

Poetical  letter, 112 


Peru  village,  lectures  in, 
Publishes  his  sixteen  lectures, 


,  112 

.  124 


Parishville,  lectures  in, 126 

Panton,  Yt.,     "         " 128 

Pittsfield,  Yt.,  "        " 132 

Pomfret,  Yt.,    "        " 133 

Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  lectures  in,  .  .  .  142 
Peabody,  Rev  Mr.,  testimony  of,  .  .  .  143 
Portland,  lectures  in,    ...    .  147.  163,  326 

Providence,    "         " 156,  349 

Phrenological  developments, 161 

Philadelphia,  lectures  in,  178,  249,  254,  263, 

349 
Pittsburg  Gazette,  remarks  in,    ....  183 

Platform"  of  the  Adventists, 229 

Peculiarities  of  J.  Starkweather,    .    .    .  231 

Piainfield  camp-meeting, 233 

Protest  of  J.  Litch  against  fanaticism,  .  234 

Penfield,  N.  Y.,  lectures  in, 247 

Phrenological  examination  of  his  head  by 

Fowler  on  the  steamboat, 248 

Personal  appearance, 249 

Passing  of  the  time, 254 

Pittsburg,  Pa.,  lectures  in, 264 

Plan  of  operations, 305 

Pillars  in  the. Temple  of  Orthodoxy,  true 

and  false, 344 


Removal  to  Low  Hampton, 63 

Reads  sermons  to  the  church, 64 

Religious  impressions,  ........    67 

Rules  of  interpretation,     .......    70 

Regard  for  the  Bible, 107 

I  Remuneration  for  his  lectures,    ....  125 

Rome,  N.  Y.,  lectures  in, 131 

I  Randolph,  Vt.,       "         " 132 

Randolph,  Mass.,  "        " 135 

Rutland,  Yt.,         "        " 138 

Robinson,  D  I.,  views  embraced  by,  .  143 
Remarks  in  an  exchange  paper,  ....  182 

Reviewers  of  Mr.  Miller, 185 

i  Rock  City,  N.  1*.,  lectures  in, 228 

I  Rochester,  N.  Y.,        "        "  .  246,  248,  264 

|  Reports  exaggerated, 276 

Results  of  the  seventh  month,    ....  293 

Richford,  Yt., 354 

i  Reply  to  letter  of  sympathy, 371 

|  Sickness  of  Mr.  M., 37,  153,  228 

1  Study  of  the  Bible, 69 

I  Sermon  on  death, 115 

j  Stansted,  C.  E.,  lectures  in, 122 

|  Sickness  and  death  of  his  mother,  .  .  .  123 
|  South  Bay>  N.  Y.,  lectures  in,  .  .  .  123, 151 
i  Stillwater,  N.  Y.,         "        "  .  124,  125,  127 

|  Shoreham,  Yt.;  "         " 124 

j  Stockholm,  N.  Y.,        "        " 126 

|Shaftsbury,.Yt,  "        " 126 

Shrewsbury,  Yt.,         "         " 126 

Stockbridge,  Yt.,         "         " 133 

Stoughton,  Mass.,        "        " 136 

Story  of  his  death  and  mistake,  ....  138 
Signs  of  the  Times,  commencement  of,  .  144 

Salisbury,  Yt.,  lectures  in, 152 

Sudburv,  Yt.,         "         " 152 

Sandv  Hill,  "         " 159 

Saratoga,  "        " 163 

Steam  and  canal  boats,  lectures  on,    .    .  167 

Synopsis  of  his  views, 170 

Statement  of  facts  by  Mr.  M 180 

Sandy  Hill  Herald,  rebuke  in  the,  .  .  .181 
Springfield,  X.  H.,  lectures  in,  ....  229 
Signs  of  the  Times,  letter  from  Mr.  M.  in 

the, 235 

Southard,  N.,  his  visit  and  description  of 

the  home  of  Wm.  Miller, 243 

Sabbath  schools, 222 

Scottsville,  lectm-es  in, 264 

Seventh  month  movement, 269 

Square  Pond,  Ct., 340 

Stowe,  Yt., 341 

South  Troy,  Yt.,  incident  at, 353 

Sermon,  "  Though  I  be  nothing,"    .    .    .  356 
Sympathy,  expression  of  by  the  Confer- 
ence,   371 

Sickness,  his  last, 376 

Scene  of  the  last  day, 405 

The  teachings  of  prophecy, 72 

Troy,  Yt.,  lectures  in, 122 

Three  Rivers,  "        " 164 

The  Fountain,  description  in, 198 

Trenton,  lectures  in, 227 

Tract  societies, 223 

Temperance  societies, 224 

Toronto,  C.  W.,  lectures  in, 264 

The  times  and  its  duties, 384 


426 


INDEX. 


The  kingdom  of  God, 392 

The  day  of  the  Lord, 421 

Universalism,  letter  on," 109 

Tisioji  of  death, 414 

Westport;  lectures  in, 101 

Wrentham,  lectures  in, 110 

Whiting,  "         " 120, 127 

Whitehall,        "        "   .    .    .    .  122, 124,  167 
West  Haven,     "        "   .    .    .    .  122  124, 128 

Waybridge,  Yt,  lectures  in, 125 

WTells,  Vt..  "        " 126 

Weston,  Vt.,  "        " 126 

WestTroy,N.Y.,        "        M 131 

White  Creek  Yt.,       "        " 132 


Woodstock,  Yt.,  lectures  in, 133 

Williston,  Yt., 
Waterbury,  Yt., 
Westford,  Yt., 
Westford,  Mass., 
Watertown,  Mass., 
Worcester,  Mass., 
Waterford,  N.  Y., 
Wilmot,  N.  H., 
Washington  city, 


.  133 
.  133,  340 
.  .  .  138 
.  .  .141 
.  .  .145 
.  .  .  161 
.  .  .  175 
.  .  .  229 
.  .  .253 


Whittier,  J.  G.,  on  the  East  Kingston 

CM 165 

"  Who  iv e  is" — conversation  of  Mr.  M. 
with  an  old  lady, 299 

Waitesfield,Yt., 340 

Westminster,  Mass., 349 


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS 


0  027  261  061  7 


