é 
Sites 
(o 

Went 
peteres3 
pares 
acee e 
petetes 
eat 
Bite, 
sees 
prtees 

wr 
ee 


cotste 
SEM Ne Hee 
Se Ss 
UNik es < ey, eh, 
eens hh ey 

~~ 


< 
= 


~ ey, 
ints te ou Se aes 


anes ~ sic Ct YL 


“ 


me 
* 


On 
ae 
+ ue 
BOG 
is 
poke haya! Si et 
Lae % . ¥en aenis % 
SS : atte Sth te hath iy Why 
~* 
5 
+s +s + 


oe 
“4 
‘es 
oe 
hate 
a 
4 2 
if 
ast 
Fee 
sete 
SG 
< 
ge 
“S 
E43 
fete 
fe be) 
Heise 
ie 
cy 
see 
42 
fe 
Sr 


Nioaicarmcent nassau aia 
RI kh RTT eee Stet ene 

ah Coe 4 a 

eceet ae 


y ‘ aS os 
y ; . Mis Gee is 
te te te a aig a 
see 7 . pa dy rss 
“. ~ Rae ; ea et he’ 4 Ss 
* heh * “ ~, b. : 4, lf oe 
Mi ceas tik at ty! So Se tise Cnet SNR hgh ees f 
hk’ i ah nt Satan fa Sak Dory eter yaoi 5 PG ; 
wy Soe Ra ak ek en IE iS hh See ees GS 
AS 4h kk TSS gett rt SL Ye ” 
wate << yee * “> ~ eS RR eee Ce 
SSNS Hn aoa ne TN) Rie Myo 
WAS yy ea yt 44% t a A ith nt Sk HG A AE a LAS 
sss SAK eh te SE eee A LAD PU tee ee datas ume td + 
Veet Seeeca auth ay oak pa ate Wh) hy ett on Aras Le 
‘ : 2 
RA Kort ak ek a A SRK Ty Rh * <8 Nh 
haa ok ah * pata steht ey ule 44 yeh Ce 
S a ae ey eit teat ey ahs eS 48 ne eee a as bey he Net x WNP rien ah, 
SARS ess ats ‘ a haya SY PS Mute yeh Sn What zi “ 
2 ee + « 
VALS Mees a SCE eae hath Hicks se a Sa teen’ an 
SAN hee se * tomy ee Tatars he KS KAN wa oe he tte te gg LY, eas a et 
Se en ek nh al $y Soh he ia * At iv 
AAA Gl Say kk Siienmeanes Ns AAAS, at See ous AW ais ran Al 
ay ath es ets ek on “2 a etait Cates Ratan enatn tN, ae, Pe a 
. k ; - * eae’ ae < 
Stats 7 S Sts * ~ EN ee et es, 4. ~ 
ey BAYS Ne Suet Sha Seen Nn a pA ot ict SSK NS Oe ao oe 
Let eats ates tee RNA a tae a EASES on eu ee CN ay AES 
TANS SS Cu RAS ++ Nt tay kd SS Ste te res © i¥ ny Ue ea 
Wa ah Ay, ts fence’ Pedi de ehh ay eee Catt! Sate eh Ric AF, petty, 
Wate shah 4. he Se Da Th 5 hN BAS, SEH at tase te Nee 
haat ek 1 A ada te I ee cee te Sa ata 
WE ea SESS aNee MY ee % Vee ey eh he et ee 
Aaa te hk ke a ee Oe th “ty i Pata + teers *+ ety *~ 
LAR e hey tee 4+ 4A4 La ts acs Seyi + Se Sete +t Lee ha +> +tet ey vee ay 
“See Wet we aes ba he tA tan Sean “tL YS SS ey ei) Aad LG eee + et 
Wit yes ee Y eat A ST ee a a Jade dy te hk SAS See + Jutta eh + ue 
SRLVAS* 8 Ay * sey ULE REE StS Nan wey SUS ye tana LA ee ke 3 aaa sey" 
Watt e eee a ~~ Byers taka Soh React as et Ree 4 ee Me tut th. KY tees v4 a 
Sosa eat LAN AN SAE Pe oe “te ~ +” Gaeey 
+ * * VLEET ra Anh hk ola’ Tete eee & tte + OES tat 
[ua + St4ey ae A hh eR gh » Ph eh SE 
SS tA Ls AS, LALA A A 
a” LAA eh ke SEE ALT I SA Ye Ye oloes 
Steaaek ogee nari tio tindy de Ron, AER NA eu 
tee Sag ete hat iy ad *eeN wea et 4 ute het 
SRS eh eee LS ee Se ey Sea KT he A ee eS 
ee Se ae Nast “Sate ttt ie AS SR Moat, 
oy 
SAN SR +++ Ly e +h a ‘ ‘ Pe eae, 
SER AN Se ‘ate tate te te “eee tN 
SUES Sa eee SPAWNS SS Sea a + ys 
EE a TG 
+ te Ueto bee ea AS SAA, 
Pele ey Sah ER i ats ey a th 
SLIT AN te Se A tht 
aa ah? Ro ete® A? Oa SO eh st Set eeu 4+ AS 2 Agar 4 4 
* ~~ » ™~ 
Pk h es PS ae Sal 4% CO SLES 
were ete hans See ete ehh + LR * 
* Sk EL LN Se a 
LS SO Se Wh A Eh aT 
IOS Wy Wa A Nae $ A+ 
MAA 04% OR ee a Oe RTS Settee 9 Sy ie eG, 
SOUS 4S 444 Pee NETY be CC Ee ety 
wenn aoe Eh IN Ths Ai 2 yA 
“Ot rate Fad eS 


= 
< 
« 
¥ 
* 
“ 
2 


O43 


te 
— 


“ 
Ve hy he fy ty Ay 
yah Di or 


Uh 4h ty 
Ae as 
4 ty ts 


5 
is 
Shs Mo hehe bs G dy dy 


My Ae eR, 
© he tet 4, 
4 


Lee 
BAe Sy he ts a 
VGA, E 
ys 
4 a'é 


ue 
eee 


ae 


oy 
oe 


% 
ena Gt 
Cran ys 

Ae 


US oue Se 
* t-se+, 

ee es 
ak 
tN oS 


* 
404 


51 
eke 


Stays 7 
A en 
RA 

fe te ey 
Nes 
ek 


+ 


s 


ie 
ee 
f 


ad 
4 


ie 


a 


Ba oh ea 
te eX aS ed ALLS 


ats E whew oP we os 
—=— PRES 60 See! 
ee ge ot pie pom = 


¢ 


VV 


‘ 


L435 


eld 
19 
= 
<x 
7.8) 
g 


s 


i 


Section — 


THE INQUISITION OF SPAIN 


WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR. 


A HISTORY OF THE INQUISITION OF THE MIDDLE AGES. 
In three volumes, octavo. 


A HISTORY OF AURICULAR CONFESSION AND INDUL- 
GENCES IN THE LATIN CHURCH. In three volumes, 
octavo. 


AN HISTORICAL SKETCH OF SACERDOTAL CELIBACY IN 
THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH. Third edition. (In prepara- 
tion.) 


A FORMULARY OF THE PAPAL PENITENTIARY IN THE 
THIRTEENTH CENTURY. One volume, octavo. (Out of 
print. ) 


SUPERSTITION AND FORCE. Essays on The Wager of Law, 
The Wager of Battle, The Ordeal, Torture. Fourth edition, 
revised. In one volume, 12mo. 


STUDIES IN CHURCH HISTORY. The Rise of the Temporal 
Power, Benefit of Clergy, Excommunication, The Early 
Church and Slavery. Second edition. In one volume, 12mo. 


CHAPTERS FROM THE RELIGIOUS HISTORY OF SPAIN, 
CONNECTED WITH THE INQUISITION. Censorship of 
the Press, Mystics and Illuminati, Endemoniadas, El Santo 
Nino de la Guardia, Brianda de Bardaxi. In one volume, 12mo. 


THE MORISCOS OF SPAIN, THEIR CONVERSION AND 
EXPULSION. In one volume, 12mo. 


(il) 


Ye\ i diab Wend DOM a NY, 


OF THE 


INQUISITION OF SPAIN 


BY y 


7 


HENRY CHARLES LEA, LL.D. 


IN FOUR VOLUMES 


VOLUME I. 


Mew Work 
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
LONDON: MACMILLAN & CO., Lr. 
1906 


All rights reserved 


i ie 

> vane tg i 

Miia ney 
. 


ae 


CopyricHt, 1906 
By THE MACMILLAN COMPANY ~ 


t 


Set up and electrotyped. Published January, 1906 


PREFACE, 


In the following pages I have sought to trace, from the original 
sources as far as possible, the character and career of an institu- 
tion which exercised no small influence on the fate of Spain and 
even, one may say, indirectly on the civilized world. The 
material for this is preserved so superabundantly in the immense 
Spanish archives that no one writer can pretend to exhaust the 
subject. There can be no finality in a history resting on so vast 
a mass of inedited documents and I do not flatter myself that I 
have accomplished such a result, but I am not without hope that 
what I have drawn from them and from the labors of previous 
scholars has enabled me to present a fairly accurate survey of 
one of the most remarkable organizations recorded in human 
annals. 

In this a somewhat minute analysis has seemed to be indispen- 
sable’ of its structure and methods of procedure, of its relations 
with the other bodies of the State and of its dealings with the 
various classes subject to its extensive jurisdiction. This has 
involved the accumulation of much detail in order to present the 
daily operation of a tribunal of which the real importance is to 
be sought, not so much in the awful solemnities of the auto de fe, 
or in the cases of a few celebrated victims, as in the silent influence 
exercised by its incessant and secret labors among the mass of 
the people and in the limitations which it placed on the Spanish 
intellect—in the resolute conservatism with which it held the 
nation in the medieval groove and unfitted it for the exercise of 
rational liberty when the nineteenth century brought in the 


inevitable Revolution. 
(v) 


ee PREFACE 


The intimate relations between Spain and Portugal, espe- 
cially during the union of the kingdoms from 1580 to 1640, has 
rendered necessary the inclusion, in the chapter devoted to the 
Jews, of a brief sketch of the Portuguese Inquisition, which 
earned a reputation even more sinister than its Spanish proto- 
type. 

I cannot conclude without expressing my thanks to the gentle- 
men whose aid has enabled me to collect the documents on which 
the work is largely based—Don Claudio Pérez Gredilla of the 
Archives of Simancas, Don Ramon Santa Marfa of those of 
Alcalé de Henares prior to their removal to Madrid, Don Fran- 
cisco de Bofarull y Sans of those of the Crown of Aragon, Don J. 
Figueroa Hernandez, formerly American Vice-consul at Madrid, 
and to many others to whom I am indebted in a minor degree. 
I have also to tender my acknowledgements to the authorities of 
the Bodleian Library and of the Royal Libraries of Copenhagen, 
Munich, Berlin and the University of Halle, for favors warmly 
appreciated. 

Henry CHarues Lea. 
PHILADELPHIA, OCTOBER, 1905. 


CONTENTS OF VOL. I. 


BOOK I—ORIGIN AND ESTABLISHMENT. 
CHapTER I—TuHeE CastTintian Monarcuy. 


Disorder at the Accession of Ferdinand and Isabella 
Condition of the Church 

Limitation of Clerical Privilege and Papal Claims 
Disputed Succession . 

Character of Ferdinand and Tsabelle 

Enforcement of Royal Jurisdiction 

The Santa Hermandad . . 

Absorption of the Military Orders 


CHAPTER JI—THE JEWS AND THE Moors. 


Oppression of Jews taught as a duty 

Growth of the Spirit of Persecution. 

Persecution under the Spanish Catholic Terao 
Toleration under the Saracen Conquest—the Mozarabes 
The Muladies . : 

The Jews under the Shslasit 

Absence of Race or Religious Hatred! 

The Mudéjares—Moors under Christian bGHaned ors 
The Church stimulates Intolerance 
Influence of the Council of Vienne in 1312 
Commencement of repressive Legislation . 


CuHapterR IJJ—TuHeE Jews AND THE CONVERSOS. 


Medieval Persecution of Jews 

Their Wealth and Influence in Spain 

Clerical Hostility aroused 

Popular Antagonism excited. . 

Causes of Dislike—Usury, Official Functions, Dutentation 
Massacres in Navarre. saee ey sit ARH 


(vii ) 


Vill CONTENTS 


Influence of the Accession of Henry of Trastamara 

The Massacres of 13891—Ferran Martinez 

Creation of the Class of Conversos or New Gimiauane 
Deplorable Condition of the Jews 

The Ordenamiento de Dofta Catalina ; 

Utterances of the Popes and the Council of Beate : 
Success of the Conversos—The Jews rehabilitate themselves . 
Renewed Repression under Ferdinand and Isabella 

The Conversos become the object of popular hatred. 
Expulsion of the Jews considered 

Expulsion resolved on in 1492—its Conditions 

Sufferings of the Exiles. 

Bn ben of Exiles . 

Contemporary Opinion 


CHAPTER I[V—ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION. 


Doubtful Christianity of the Conversos 
Inquisition attempted in 1451. . . 
Alonso de Espina and his Fortalicium Fidei 
Episcopal Inquisition attempted in 1465 . 
Sixtus IV grants Inquisitorial Powers to his Legate 
Attempt to convert and instruct. 
Ferdinand and Isabella apply to Sixtus IV for einen in 1478 
They Require the Power of Appointment and the Confiscations . 
The first Inquisitors appointed, September 17, 1480 .. . 
Tribunal opened in Seville—first Auto de Fe, Pebraary 6, 1481 
Plot to resist betrayed car, ; 
Edict of Grace 
Other tribunals established Soot 
Failure of plot in Toledo—number of Penivents 
Tribunal at Guadalupe . 
Necessity of Organization—The Sitios’ Coungileathe Srlethe: 
itor-general 
Character of Torquemada—His aera mate finantsrats 
Four Assistant Inquisitors-general . 
Separation of Aragon from Castile : 
Autonomy of Inquisition—It frames its own Rules : 
It commands the Forces of the State.—Flight of een ; 
Emigration of New Christians forbidden ; 
Absence of Resistance to the Inquisition . 
Ferdinand seeks to prevent Abuses 
The Career of Lucero at Cordova 
Complicity of Juan Roiz de Calcena 


PAGE 


101 
103 
111 
115 
116 
118 
120 
123 
125 
151 
135 
159 
142 
143 


145 
147 
148 
153 
154 
155 
157 
158 
160 
161 
162 
165 
166 
168 
171 


172 
174 
178 
180 
181 
182 
184 
185 
187 
189 
193 


CONTENTS 


Persecution of Archbishop Hernando de Talavera 
Cordova appeals to Philip and Juana 
Revolt in Cordova , 
Inquisitor-general Deza prea ts resipn 
Lucero placed on trial 
Inquisitorial Abuses at Jaen, Arjona ad erent 
Ximenes attempts Reform . 
Appeals to Charles V—His futile Benject i Rotor 
Conquest of Navarre—Introduction of Inquisition 


CHAPTER V—THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON. 


Independent Institutions of Aragon 
Ferdinand seeks to remodel the Old Inquisition 
Sixtus IV interferes ; 
Torquemada’s Authority is ended over “head 
Assented to by the Cértes of Tarazona in 1484 
VALENCIA 
Popular Resistance 
Resistance overcome 
ARAGON 
Tribunal organized in Saragossa 
Opposition 
Resistance in ere! 
Murder of Inquisitor Arbués 
Papal Brief commanding Extradition 
Punishment of the Assassins 
Ravages of the Inquisition 
CATALONIA 
Its Jealousy of its Liberties 
Resistance prolonged until 1487 
Scanty Results 
Oppression and Complaints 
THE BALEARIC ISLES 
Inertia of the Old Inquisition ; 
Introduction of the New in 1488—Its Activity 
Tumult in 1518 ; 
Complaints of Cortes of Moncon in 1510 
Concordia of 1512 . . 
Leo X releases Ferdinand fron His Oath 
Inquisitor-general Mercader’s Instructions 
Leo X.confirms the Concordia of 1512 . 
Charles V swears to observe the Concordia 
Dispute over fresh Demands of Aragon 


ix 
PAGE 
ADy 
201 
202 
205 
206 
211 
215 
216 
223 


229 
230: 
233 
236 
238 


239 
242. 


244 
245 
247 
249 
253 
256. 
259 


260: 
261 
263 
264 


266 
267 
268. 
269 
270 
272 
273 
274 
275 
276 


me | CONTENTS 


Decided in favor of Aragon 
Catalonia secures Concessions . 
Futility of all Agreements—Fruitless Complaints of Grievances! 


BOOK ITI—RELATIONS WITH THE STATE. 


CHAPTER IJ—RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN. 


Combination of Spiritual and Temporal Jurisdiction 
Ferdinand’s Control of the Inquisition 

Except in Spiritual Affairs 
Gradual Development of Independence 
Philip IV reasserts Control over Appointments 
It returns to the Inquisitor-general under Carlos II 
‘The Crown retains Power of appointing the Inquisitor-general . 
It cannot dismiss him but can enforce his Resignation—Cases . 
Struggle of Philip V with Giudice—Case of Melchor de Macanaz 
Cases under Carlos III and Carlos IV Pete Te 
Relations of the Crown with the Suprema 
The Suprema interposes between the Crown and Hie Tribunals 
It acquires control over the Finances 

Its Policy of Concealment 

Philip IV calls on it for Assistance 

Philip V reasserts Control 

Pecuniary Penances . 
Assertion of Independence 
Temporal Jurisdiction over Officials : 
Growth of Bureaucracy limits Royal Autocracy. 
Reassertion of Royal Power under the House of Bonen 


CHAPTER [I—SUPEREMINENCE. 


Universal Subordination to the Inquisition 

Its weapons of Excommunication and Inhibition 
Power of Arrest and Imprisonment 

Assumption of Superiority 

Struggle of the Bishops 

Questions of Precedence. 

Superiority to local Law 

Capricious Tyranny 

Inviolability of Officials and Servants 
Enforcement of Respect . ; 


PAGE 
282 
283 
284 


dol 


371 


CONTENTS — 


CHaptrer [II—PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS. 


Exemption from taxation : 

Exemption from Custom-house Dues aes 
Attempts of Valencia Tribunal to import Wheat from Aragon : 
Privilege of Valencia Tribunal in the Public Granary 
Speculative Exploitation of Privileges by Saragossa TrbaHal : 
Coercive Methods of obtaining Supplies 

Valencia asserts Privilege of obtaining Salt 

Exemption from Billets of Troops 

The Right to bear Arms : 

Exemption from Military Service . 

The Right to hold Secular Office 

The Right to refuse Office 

The Right of Asylum 


CHAPTER ILV—CoONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS. 


Benefit of Clergy 
Ferdinand grants to the Inquisition paclasive Jurisdiction « over 
its Officials . 
He confines it to Salaried Omicials: in habs ators ad as 
Defendants in civil Suits 
Abusive Extension of Jurisdiction by Tngiisitors 
Limitations in the Concordia of 1512 
Servants of Officials included in the juero 
Struggle in Castile over the Question of Familiars 
Settled by the Concordia of 1553 
The Concordia extended to Navarre 
Struggle in Valencia—Concordia of 1554 
Concordia disregarded—Cortes of 1564 
Valencia Concordia of 1568 
Disregard of its Provisions 
Complaints of criminal Familiars eutyaruanslbyes 
Aragon—its Court of the Justicia 
Grievances arising from the Temporal Tmediction: 
The Concordia of 1568 
Complaints of its Infraction Cortes or 1626 
Case of the City of Huesca 
Cértes of 1646—Aragon assimilated 40 Caatile 
Diminished Power of the Inquisition in Aragon . 
Catalonia—Non-observance of Concordias of 1512 and 1520 
Disorders of the Barcelona Tribunal—Fruitless Complaints 


xi 


PAGE 


SYA) 
384 
389 
388 
389 
392 
394 
395 
401 
412 
415 
420 
421 


427 
429 


430 
431 
432 
432 
434 
436 
438 
439 
441 
442 
445 
446 
450 
452 
454 
454 
456 
458 
461 
465 
467 


ei CONTENTS 


PAG 

Catalonia—Hatred of the Tribunal—Catalonia rejects the @on- z 

cordia of 1568 . . Nani tege tna at eee ee 

Cortes of 1599—Duplicity of Pel Il ety A71 
Increasing Discord—Fruitless Efforts of Cortes of 1626 and 

1632—Concordia of Zapata . 472 
Rebellion of 1640—Expulsion of Inquisitors—A Natonn 

Inquisition established eolee a ee 


Inquisition restored in 1652—Renewal of Discord «is eee 
War of Succession—Catalan Liberties abolished . . . . 483° 
Majorca—Conflicts with the Civil Authorities . . . . . 484 
Contests in Castile—Subservience of the Royal Power . . . 485 
Exemption of Familiars from summons as Witnesses . . . 491 


Conflicts with the Spiritual Courts .. . «| ie) lige ae 
Cases in Majorca—Intervention of the Holy See o) oe eee 
Conflicts with the Military Courts . . 504 
Conflicts with the Military Oiders = broiects of “the Order of 
Santa Marta de la Espada Blanca . . oa) ne 
Profits of the Temporal Jurisdiction of the Inquisition «ei 
Abuses and evils of the System Sans PPA Rr 
Fruitless Efforts to reform it in 1677 and 1696 - Yi: 
Repression under the House of Bourbon . .. ... . 514 
Competencias for Settlement of Disputes . . AC er 
The Temporal Jurisdiction under the nsdenetaal . i 
Refusal of Competencias by the Inquisition . . . . . . O21 
Projects of Relief BMY sees “VC Spices tay Siege «lilac fete aioe ene Ce 


CHAPTER V—PopuLAR HOSstTILITY. 


Causes of Popular Hatred . . we het 9 en et ao 
Visitations of the Barcelona imal ynial alo. rr 
Troubles in Logrono , yaoi hy aoe ae ar 
Preferences ti ied in Markets, eijcse. coiubile')|. 0) oth ete San 
Trading by Officials Marta Petree ahr) ky 
Character of Officials Be dn iene ila cea a ce ils iy ee er 
Grievances of; Feudal (Nobles 5) 23°93 ee 
General Detestation a recognized Fact . . . . . . . 9838 
Apprnprx. “Listiof Tribunals 2. (24.0 00, 

List: of Inquisitors-general ..) 5... | <, ) 3) os) 

Spanish Coinage. 0s AU aio es ta) 2 


DoctimentSy <.. 5.5: 4 biwncare te OA ee oe Ue enc 


THE INQUISITION OF SPAIN 


. 
a y age 
oH) 
* Mien 


i 
‘f € Ws 


‘ 


THE INQUISITION OF SPAIN. 


BOOK L 


ORIGIN AND ESTABLISHMENT. 


GHEASP TE Rar 


THE CASTILIAN MONARCHY. 


Ir were difficult to exaggerate the disorder pervading the 
Castilian kingdoms, when the Spanish monarchy found its origin 
in the union of Isabella of Castile and Ferdinand of Aragon. 
Many causes had contributed to prolong and intensify the evils 
of the feudal system and to neutralize such advantages as it 
possessed. The struggles of the reconquest from the Saracen, 
continued at intervals through seven hundred years and varied 
by constant civil broils, had bred a race of fierce and turbulent 
nobles as eager to attack a neighbor or their sovereign as the 
Moor. The contemptuous manner in which the Cid is repre- 
sented, in the earliest ballads, as treating his king, shows what 
was, in the twelfth century, the feeling of the chivalry of Castile 
toward its overlord, and a chronicler of the period seems rather 
to glory in the fact that it was always in rebellion against the 
royal power.’ So fragile was the feudal bond that a ricohome or 
noble could at any moment renounce allegiance by a simple mes- 
sage sent to the king through a hidalgo.* The necessity of attract- 


1 Romancero del Cid, pp. 12, 74, 77, 79, 87, 88, ete. (Frankofurto, 1828).— 
Crénica de Alfonso VII, 138-141 (Florez, Espafia Sagrada, X XI, 403)— 
‘“‘Castelle vires per seecula fuere rebelles: 
Inclyta Castella ciens sevissima bella 
Vix cuiquam regum voluit submittere collum: 
Indomite vixit, cceli lux quandiu luxit.”’ 
2 Fuero Viejo de Castiella, Lib. 1, Tit. iii, 33. Cf. Partidas, P. 1v, Tit. xxv, 


ley 7. 
7 1 (1) 


9 THE CASTILIAN MONARCHY [Boox I 


ing population and organizing conquered frontiers, which sub- 
sequently became inland, led to granting improvidently liberal 
franchises to settlers, which weakened the powers of the crown,' 
without building up, as in France, a powerful Third Estate to 
serve as a counterpoise to the nobles and eventually to under- 
mine feudalism. In Spain the business of the Castilian was war. 
The arts of peace were left with disdain to the Jews and the con- 
quered Moslems, known as Mudéjares, who were allowed to 
remain on Christian soil and to form a distinct element in the 
population. No flourishing centres of industrious and independ- 
ent burghers arose out of whom the kings could mould a body 
that should lend them efficient support in their struggles with 
their powerful vassals. The attempt, indeed, was made; the 
Cértes, whose co-operation was required in the enactment of 
laws, consisted of representatives from seventeen cities,” who 
while serving enjoyed personal inviolability, but so little did the 
cities prize this privilege that, under Henry IV, they complained 
of the expense of sending deputies. The crown, eager to find 
some new sources of influence, agreed to pay them and thus 
obtained an excuse for controlling their election, and although 
this came too late for Henry to benefit by it, it paved the way 
for the assumption of absolute domination by Ferdinand and 
Isabella, after which the revolt of the Comunidades proved fruit- 
less. Meanwhile their influence diminished, their meetings were 
scantily attended and they became little more than an instru- 
ment which, in the interminable strife that cursed the land, was 
used alternately by any faction as opportunity offered.® 

The crown itself had contributed greatly to its own abasement. 
When, in the thirteenth century, a ruler such as San Fernando 
III. made the laws respected and vigorously extended the bound- 


See, for instance, the charter granted by Raymond Berenger IV of Barcelona, 
in 1108, to Olerdula, after a devastating Saracen inroad, and the charter of 
Lérida in 1148, after its capture from the Moors.—Marca Hispanica, pp. 1233, 
1305. The same causes were operative in Castile. 

* The cities entitled to send procurators to the Cértes were Burgos, Leon, 
Avila, Segovia, Zamora, Toro, Salamanca, Soria, Murcia, Cuenca, Toledo, Seville, 
Cérdova, Jaen, Valladolid, Madrid and Guadalajara.—Pulgar, Crénica, P. u, 
cap. XCcVv. 

* Marina, Teoria de las Cértes, P. 1, cap. xvi, xx. (Madrid, 1820.).—Siete Par- 
tidas, P. u, Tit. xvi, ley 4.—Modesto de Lafuente, Hist. Gen. de Espafia, IX, 
34.—J, Bernays, Zur inneren Entwicklung Castiliens (Deutsche Zeitschrift fir 
Geschichtswissenschaft, 1889, pp. 381 sqq.). 


Cuap. IJ] ABASEMENT OF THE CROWN 3 


aries of Christianity, Castile gave promise of development in 
power and culture which miserably failed in the performance. 
In 1282 the rebellion of Sancho el Bravo against his father 
Alfonso was the commencement of decadence. To purchase 
the allegiance of the nobles he granted them all that they asked, 
and to avert the discontent consequent on taxation he sup- 
plied his treasury by alienating the crown lands." Notwith- 
standing the abilities of the regent, Maria de Molina, the suc- 
cessive minorities of her son and grandson, Fernando IV and 
Alfonso XI, stimulated the downward progress, although the 
vigor of the latter in his maturity restored in some degree the 
lustre of the crown and his stern justice re-established order, 
so that, as we are told, property could be left unguarded in the 
streets at night.2>. His son, Don Pedro, earned the epithet of 
the Cruel by his ruthless endeavor to reduce to obedience his 
turbulent nobles, whose disaffection invited the usurpation 
of his bastard brother, Henry of Trastamara. The throne which 
the latter won by fratricide and the aid of the foreigner, he 
could only hold by fresh concessions to his magnates which 
fatally reduced the royal power.’ This heritage he left to his 
son, Juan IJ, who forcibly described, in the Cértes of Valladolid 
in 1385, how he wore mourning in his heart because of his power- 
lessness to administer justice and to govern as he ought, in con- 
sequence of the evil customs which he was unable to correct. 
This depicts the condition of the monarchy during the century 
intervening between the murder of Pedro and the accession of 
Isabella—a dreary period of endless revolt and civil strife, dur- 
ing which the central authority was steadily growing less able 
to curb the lawless elements tending to eventual anarchy. The 
king was little more than a puppet of which rival factions sought 
to gain possession in order to cover their ambitions with a cloak 
of legality, and those which failed to secure his person treated 
his authority with contempt, or set up some rival in a son or 
brother as an excuse for rebellion. The work of the Recon- 
quest which, for six hundred years, had been the leading object 


1 Crénica de Don Alfonso X, cap. clxxvi.—Barrantes, Ilustraciones de la Casa 
de Niebla, Lib. 1, cap. xiv (Memorial histérico espafiol, VIII). 

? Crénica de Don Alfonso XI, cap. lxxx.—Barrantes, op. cit. Lib. 1, cap. xxvi, 
Ne oa 

3 Ayala, Crénica de Pedro I, afio xvi, cap. vii. 

4 Cértes de los antiguos Reinos de Leon y de Castilla, II, 330 (Madrid, 1863). 


4 THE CASTILIAN MONARCHY [Boox I 


of national pride was virtually abandoned, save in some spas- 
modic enterprise, such as the capture of Antequera, and the 
little kingdom of Granada, apparently on the point of extinction 
under Alfonso XI, seemed destined to perpetuate for ever on 
Spanish soil the hateful presence of the crescent. 

The long reign of the feeble Juan II, from 1406 to 1454, was 
followed by that of the feebler Henry IV, popularly known as 
El Impotente. In the Seguro de Tordesillas, in 1439, the dis- 
affected nobles virtually dictated terms to Juan II.* In the 
Deposition of Avila, in 1465, they treated Henry IV with the 
bitterest contempt. His efhigy, clad in mourning and adorned 
with the royal insignia, was placed upon a throne and four 
articles of accusation were read. For the first he was pronounced 
unworthy of the kingly station, when Alonso Carrillo, Arch- 
bishop of Toledo, removed the crown; for the second he was 
deprived of the administration of justice, when Alvaro de Zufiga, 
Count of Plasencia, took away the sword; for the third he was 
deprived of the government, when Rodrigo Pimentel, Count of 
Benavente, struck the sceptre away; for the fourth he was sen- 
tenced to lose the throne, when Diego Lépez de Zufiiga tumbled 
the image from its seat with an indecent gibe. It was scarce 
more than a continuation of the mockery when they elected as 
his successor his brother Alfonso, a child eleven years of age.’ 

The lawless independence of the nobles and the effacement 
of the royal authority may be estimated from a single example. 
At Plasencia two powerful lords, Garef Alvarez de Toledo, 
Sefior of Oropesa, and Hernan Rodriguez de Monroy, kept the 
country in an uproar with their armed dissension. Juan II 
sent Ayala, Sefior of Cebolla, with a royal commission to sup- 
press the disorder. Monroy, in place of submitting, insulted 
Ayala, who as a ‘‘buen caballero” disdained to complain to the 
king and preferred to avenge himself. Juan on hearing of this 
summoned to his presence Monroy, who collected all his friends 
and retainers and set out with a formidable army. Ayala made 
a similar levy and set upon him as he passed near Cebolla. There 
was a desperate battle in which Ayala was worsted and forced 
to take refuge in Cebolla, while Monroy passed on to Toledo 


1 Seguro de Tordesillas, Madrid, 1784. 
* Castillo, Cr6énica de Enrique IV, cap. lxxiv.—Valera, Memorial de diversas 
Hazafias, cap. xxviii—Pulgar, Crénica, p. 3 (Ed. 1780). 


Cuap. J] VIOLENCE AND TREACHERY 5 


and, when he kissed the king’s hands, Juan told him that he had 
sent for him to cut off his head, but as Ayala had preferred to 
right himself he gave Monroy a God-speed on his journey home 
and washed his hands of the whole affair.’ 

The ricosomes who thus were released from all the restraint 
of law had as little respect for those of honor and morality. 
The virtues which we are wont to ascribe to chivalry were 
represented by such follies as the celebrated Passo Honroso of 
Suero de Quifiones, when that knight and his nine comrades, 
in 1434, kept, in honor of their ladies, for thirty days against all 
comers, the pass of the Bridge of Orbigo, at the season of the 
feast of Santiago and sixty-nine challengers presented them- 
selves in the lists.2 With exceptions’such as this, and a rare 
manifestation of magnanimity, as when the Duke of Medina 
Sidonia raised an army and hastened to the relief of his enemy, 
Rodrigo Ponce de Leon besieged in Alhama,* the record of the 
time is one of the foulest treachery, from which truth and honor 
are absent and human nature displays itself in its basest aspect. 
According to contemporary belief, Ferdinand was indebted 
for the crown of Aragon to the poisoning of his brother, the 
deeply mourned Carlos, Prince of Viana, while the crown of Castile 
fell to Isabella through the similar taking off of her brother 
Alfonso.* 

A characteristic incident is one involving Dofia Marfa de Mon- 
roy, who married into the great house of Henriquez of Seville, 
and was left a widow with two boys. When the youths were re- 
spectively eighteen and nineteen years old they were close friends 
of two gentlemen of Seville named Mangano. The younger 
brother, dicing with them in their house, was involved in a 
quarrel with them, when they set upon him with their servants 
and slew him. Then, fearing the vengeance of the elder brother, 
they sent him a friendly message to come and play with them; 
when he came they led him along a dark corridor in which they 
suddenly turned upon him and stabbed him to death. When 


1 Maldonado, Hechos de Don Alonso de Monrroy (Memorial histérico espafiol, 
T. VI, p. 14). ) 

2 Juan de Pineda, El Libro del Passo Honroso, Madrid, 1784.—Pulgar, Claros 
Varones, Tit. xiv. . 

’ Barrantes, Ilustraciones de la Casa de Niebla, Lib. vi11, cap. xxiv. 

4 Valera, Memorial de diversas Hazafias, cap. xix., xl—Amador de los Rios, 
Historia de los Judfos, III, 205. 


6 THE CASTILIAN MONARCHY [Boox I 


the disfigured corpses of her boys were brought to Dofia Maria 
she shed no tears, but the fierceness of her eyes frightened all 
who looked upon her. The Mancanos promptly took horse and 
fled to Portugal, whither Dofia Marfa followed them in male 
attire with a band of twenty cavaliers. Her spies were speedily 
on the track of the fugitives; within a month of the murders 
she came at night to the house where they lay concealed; the 
doors were broken in and she entered with ten of her men while 
the rest kept guard outside. The Mancanos put themselves in 
defence and shouted for help, but before the neighbors could 
assemble she had both their heads in her left hand and was 
galloping off with her troop, never stopping till she reached 
Salamanca, where she went to the church and laid the bloody 
heads on the tomb of her boys. Thenceforth she was known 
as Dofia Maria la Brava, and her exploit led to long and mur- 
derous feuds between the Monroyes and the Manganos.’ 

Dofia Maria was but a type of the unsexed women, mugeres 
varoniles, common at the time, who would take the field or 
maintain their place in factious intrigue with as much ferocity 
and pertinacity as men. Ferdinand could well look without 
surprise on the activity in court and camp of his queen Isabella, 
when he remembered the prowess of his mother, Juana Henri- 
quez, who had secured for him the crown of Aragon. Dofia 
Leonora Pimentel, Duchess of Arévalo, was one of these; of the 
Countess of Medellin it was said that no Roman captain could 
get the better of her in feats of arms, and the Countess of Haro 
was equally noted. The Countess of Medellin, indeed, kept 
her own son in prison for years while she enjoyed the revenues 
of his town of Medellin and, when Queen Isabella refused to 
confirm her possession of the place, she transferred her allegiance 
to the King of Portugal to whom she delivered the castle of 
Merida. At the same time the Moorish influence, which was so 
strong in Castile, occasionally led to the opposite extreme. The 
Duke of Najera kept his daughters in such absolute seclusion 
that no man, not even his sons, was permitted to enter the apart- 
ments reserved for the women, and the reason he alleged—that 
the heart does not covet what the eye does not see—was little 
flattering to either sex.’ 


* Maldonado, Hechos de Don Alonso de Monrroy, pp. 17-19. 
> Maldonado, op. cit. pp. 65, 71, 72, 83.—Barrantes, Ilustraciones de la Casa 
de Niebla, Lib. viu, cap. iii—Hazafias valerosas de Pedro Manrique de Lara 


Cuap. IJ] VIRTUAL ANARCHY 76 


The condition of the common people can readily be imagined 
in this perpetual strife between warlike, ambitious and unprin- 
cipled nobles, now uniting in factions which involved the whole 
realm in war, and now contenting themselves with assaults 
upon their neighbors. The land was desolated; the husband- 
man scarce could take heart to plant his seed, for the harvest 
was apt to be garnered with the sword and thrust into castles 
to provision them against siege. As a writer of the period 
tells us, there was neither law nor justice save that of arms.’ 
In a letter describing the universal anarchy, written by Her- 
nando del Pulgar from Madrid, in 1473, he says that for more 
than five years there has been no communication from Murcia, 
where the family of Fajardo reigned supreme—it is, he says, as 
foreign a land as Navarre. That the roads were unsafe for 
trade or travel was a matter of course; every petty hidalgo con- 
verted his stronghold into a den of robbers, and what these left 
was swept away by bands of Free Companions.* Disorder 
reigned supreme and all-pervading. The crown was powerless 
and the royal treasury exhausted. Improvident grants of lands 
and revenues and jurisdictions, to bribe the treacherous fidelity 
of faithless nobles, or to gratify worthless favorites, were made, 
till there was nothing left to give, and then Henry IV bestowed 
licenses for private mints, until there were a hundred and fifty 
of them at work, flooding the land with base money, to the 
unutterable confusion of the coinage and the impoverishment 
of the people.* The Cortes of Madrid, in 1467, and of Ocafia 
in 1469, called on Henry to resume his improvident grants, and 
those of Madrigal, in 1476, repeated the urgency to Ferdinand 
and Isabella, who had been forced to follow his example. To 
this the sovereigns replied thanking the Cortes and postponing 
the matter. They did not feel themselves strong enough until 
1480, when at the Cortes of Toledo, they resumed thirty 
million maravedis of revenue which had been alienated during 


(Memorial histérico espafiol, T. VI, pp. 123, 126).—Hernando del Pulgar, 
Crénica, P. 1, cap. lxxxiii. 

1 Maldonado, op. cit., pp. 23, 52, 71, 73. 

2 Clemencin, Elégio de Dofia Isabel, p. 127. 

3 Castillo, Cr6énica de Enrique IV, cap. cliii. 

* Pulgar, Claros Varones de Espajia (Elzevir, 1670, p. 6).—Castillo, op. cit. 
cap. cxliii—Saez, Monedas de Enrique IV, pp. 3, 7, 23 (Madrid, 1805). At the 
Cértes of Segovia, in 1471, Henry ordered the destruction of all the private mints, 


8 THE CASTILIAN MONARCHY [Boox I 


the troubles, and this after an investigation which left untouched 
the gifts to loyal subjects and only withdrew such as had been 
extorted.! Respect for the crown had fallen as low as its revenues. 
A story told of the Count of Benavente shows how difficult it 
was, even after the accession of Isabella, for the nobles to recog- 
nize that they owed any obedience to the sovereign. He was 
walking with the queen when a woman came weeping and beg- 


ging justice, saying that he had had her husband slain in spite 


of a royal safe-conduct. She showed the letter which her hus- 
band had earried in his breast, pierced by the blow which had 
ended his life, when the count jeeringly remarked ‘‘A cuirass 
would have been of more service.’ Piqued by this Isabella said 


“‘Count do you then not wish there was no king in Castile?” 


‘‘Rather,” said he, ‘‘I wish there were many.” ‘‘And why?” 
‘Because then I should be one of them.’” 

In such a chaos of lawless passion it is not to be supposed that 
the Church was better than the nobles who filled its high places 
with worthless scions of their stocks, or than the lower classes 
of the laity who sought in it provision for a life of idleness and 
licence. The primate of Castile was the Archbishop of Toledo, who 
was likewise ex officio chancellor of the realm and whose revenues 


‘were variously estimated at from eighty to a hundred thousand 


ducats, with patronage at his disposal amounting to a hundred 
thousand more.* The occupant of this exalted position, at the 
accession of Isabella, was Alonso Carrillo, a turbulent prelate, 


but it is not likely that he was obeyed (Cértes de Leon y de Castilla, III, 830, 


Madrid, 1866). Garcia Lépez de Salazar, a contemporary, tells us that the gold 
Enriques were originally 233 carats fine, but those struck in the royal mints grad- 
ually fell to seven carats, while the private mints made them what they pleased. 
—Saez, p. 418. 

Spanish coinage is an intricate subject, and as some knowledge of it is necessary 
for the proper understanding of sums of money referred to hereafter, I have 
given a brief account of it in the Appendix. 

1 Cértes de los antiguos Reinos de Leon y de Castilla, IV, 59-68.—Novisima 
Recopilacion, Lib. 11, Tit. v, ley 10, 11.—Barrantes, Tlustraciones de la Casa 
de Niebla, Lib. vim, cap. xxiii—Garibay, Compendio Historial, Lib. xvim, 
cap. xvi.—Don Clemencin (op. cit. p. 146). 

At the death of Henry IV, in 1474, the royal revenue had fallen to about ten 
million maravedis. By 1477 it increased to 27,415,626, by 1482 to 150,695,288, 
and in 1504, at the death of Isabella, it was 341,733,597.—Clemencin, p. 153. 

* Misceldinea de Zapata (Mem. hist. espafiol, T. XI, p. 332). 

* L. Marinzeus Siculus de Reb. Hispan. (R. Beli Rer. Hispan. Scriptt, p. 774). 
—Damiani a Goes Hispania (Ibid. p. 1237). 


Cuap. J] CHARACTER OF PRELATES 9 


delighting in war, foremost in all the civil broils of the period, 
who, not content with the immense income of his see, lavished 
extravagant sums in alchemy. Hernando del Pulgar, in a letter 
of remonstrance, said to him, ‘‘The people look to you as their 
bishop and find in you their enemy; they groan and complain 
that you use your authority not for their benefit and reforma- 
tion but for their destruction; not as an exemplar of kindness 
and peace but for corruption, scandal, and disturbance.’”’ When, 
in 1495, the puritan Ximenes was appointed to the archbishopric, 
one of his first acts is said to have been the removal, from near 
the altar of the Franciscan church of Toledo, of a magnificent 
tomb which Carrillo had erected to his bastard, Troilo Carrillo. 

His successor in the see of Toledo has a special interest for us 
in view of his labors to purify the faith which culminated in 
establishing the Inquisition. Pero Gonzdlez de Mendoza was 
one of the notable men of the day, whose influence with Fer- 
dinand and Isabella won for him the name of ‘‘the third king.” 
While yet a child he held the curacy of Hita; at twelve he had the 
archdeaconry of Guadalajara, one of the richest benefices in Spain, 
which he retained during the successive bishoprics of Calahorra 
and Sigiienza and the archbishopric of Seville; the see of Sigitienza 
he kept during the whole tenure successively of the archiepisco- 
pates of Seville and Toledo, in addition to which he was a car- 
dinal and titular Patriarch of Alexandria. With his kindred of 
the powerful house of Mendoza he adhered to Henry IV, until 
they effected the sale of the hapless Beltraneja, who was in their 
hands, to her father, Henry, for certain estates and the title of 
Duke del Infantado for Diego Hurtado, the head of the family, 
after which Pero Gonzdlez and his kinsmen promptly transferred 
their allegiance to Isabella. His admiring biographer assures us 
that he was more ready with his hands than with his tongue, 
that he was a gallant knight and that there was never a war in 
Spain during his time in which he did not personally take part 
or at least have his troops engaged. Though he had no leisure 


1 Pulgar, Claros Varones, Tit. xx; Letras No. iii.—Fléchier, Histoire du Car- 
dinal Ximenes, II, 291 (Ed. 1693). 

The Cértes of Toledo, in 1462, among their grievances, include the factious 
turbulence of the clergy—‘“bien sabe vuestra alteza commo algunos obispos e 
abades e otras eclesiasticas personas se han fecho y de cada dia se fazen de vandos, 
e algunos dellos tanto e mas escandalizan vuestras cibdades e villas que los legos 
dellas.’’—Cértes de Leon vy de Castilla, III, 711 (Madrid, 1866). 


10 THE CASTILIAN MONARCHY [Boox I 


to attend to his spiritual duties, he found time to yield to the 
temptations of the flesh. When, in 1484, he led the army of 
invasion into Granada he took with him his bastard, Rodrigo 
de Mendoza, a youth of twenty, who was already Sefior del 
Castillo del Cid, and who, in 1492, was created Marquis of Cenete 
on the occasion of his marriage, amid great rejoicings, in the 
presence of Ferdinand and Isabella, to Leonor de la Cerda, 
daughter and heiress of the Duke of Medina Celi and niece of 
Ferdinand himself. This was not the only evidence of his frailty 
of which he took no shame, for he had another son named Juan, 
by a lady of Valladolid, who was married to Done Ana de Aragon, 
another niece of Ferdinand.’ 

With such men at the head of the Church it is not to be 
expected that the lower orders of the clergy should be models of 
decency and morality, rendering Christianity attractive to Jew 
and Moslem. Alonso Carrillo, the archbishop of Toledo, can 
scarce be regarded as a strict disciplinarian, but even he felt 
obliged, when holding the council of Aranda in 1473, to endeavor 
to repress the more flagrant scandals of the clergy. As a cor- 
rective of their prevailing ignorance it was ordered that in future 
none should be ordained who could not speak Latin—the lan- 
guage of the ritual and the foundation of all instruction, theo- 
logical and otherwise. They were forbidden to wear silk or 
gaily colored garments. As their licentiousness rendered them 
contemptible to the people, they were commanded to part with 
their concubines within two months. As their fondness for 
dicing led to perjuries, scandals and homicides, they were 
required thereafter to abstain from it, privately as well as pub- 
licly. As many priests disdained to celebrate mass, they were 
ordered to do so at least four times a year; bishops, moreover, 
were urged to celebrate at least thrice a year, under pain of 
severe penalties to be determined at the next council. The 
absurdities poured forth in their sermons by wandering priests 
and friars were to be repressed by requiring examinations prior 
to issuing licenses to preach, and the scandals of the pardon- 
sellers were to be diminished by subjecting them to the bishops. 
The bishops were also urged to make severe examples of offenders 
in the lower orders of the clergy, when delivered to them by the 


* Francisco de Medina, Vida del Cardenal Mendoza (Mem. hist. espafiol, 
T. VI, pp. 156, 190, 1938-4, 255, 293-4, 297, 304). 


Cuap. I] CONDITION OF THE CHURCH 1f 


secular courts, and not to allow their enormities to enjoy con- 
tinued immunity. The bishops, moreover, were commanded: 
to make no charge for conferring ordinations; they were ex- 
horted, and all other clerics were required, not to lead a dissolute: 
military life or to enter the service of secular lords excepting of 
the king and princes of the blood. As duels were forbidden, 
both laity and clergy were warned that if slain in such encoun- 
ters they would be refused Christian burial.’ That this effort. 
at reform was, as might be expected, wholly abortive is evi- 
denced from the description of the vices of the ecclesiastical 
body when Ferdinand and Isabella subsequently endeavored to: 
correct its more flagrant scandals.2 It was wholly secularized 
and only to be distinguished from the laity by the sacred func- 
tions which rendered its vices more abhorrent, by the immunities: 
which fostered and stimulated those vices and by the intolerance 
which, blind to all aberrations of morals, proclaimed the stake 
to be the only fitting punishment for aberration in the faith. 
While powerless to reform itself it yet had influence enough to: 
educate the people up to its standard of orthodoxy in the ruth- 
less persecution of all whom it pleased to designate as enemies. 
of Christ. 

Yet in Spain the immunities and privileges of the Church were 
less than elsewhere throughout Christendom. The independ-. 
ence which the secular power in Castile had always manifested 
toward the Holy See and its disregard of the canon law are 
points which will occasionally manifest themselves hereafter 
and are worthy of a moment’s consideration here. I have else- 
where shown that, alone among the Latin nations, Castile steadily 
refused to admit the medieval Inquisition and disregarded com- 
pletely the prescriptions of the Church regarding heresy.* In 
the twelfth century the popular feeling toward the papacy is. 
voiced in the ballads of the Cid. When a demand for tribute to 
the Emperor Henry IV is said to be made through the pope, 
Ruy Diaz advises King Fernando to send a defiance from both 
of them to the pope and all his party, which the monarch accord- 
ingly does, So when the Cid accompanies his master to a great. 


? Concil. Arandens. ann. 1473, cap. 3, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 20, 25 (Aguirre, 
V, 344-50). 

2 L. Marinei Siculi de Rebus Hispan. Lib. xrx.—Raynald. Annal. ann. 1483,. 
n. 15; ann. 1485, n. 26. 

8 History of the Inquisition of the Middle Ages, Vol. II, pp. 180 sqq. 


12 THE CASTILIAN MONARCHY [Book I 


council in Rome and kicks over the chair prepared for the King 
of France, the pope excommunicates him, whereupon he kneels 
before the holy father and asks for absolution, telling him it 
will be the worse for him if he does not grant it, which the pope 
promptly does on condition of his being more self-restrained 
during the remainder of his stay.*. There is no trace of the venera- 
tion for the vice-gerent of God which elsewhere was inculcated 
as an indispensable religious duty. | 

When such was the popular temper it is easy to understand 
that the prohibition to carry money out of the kingdom to the 
pope was even more emphatic than in England” The claim 
to control the patronage of the Church, which was so prolific a 
source of revenue to the curia, met throughout Spain a resist- 
ance as sturdy as in England, though the troubled condition of 
the land interfered with its success. In Catalonia, the Cortes, in 
1419, adopted a law in which, after alluding to the scandals and 
irreparable injuries arising from the intrusion of strangers, it 
was declared that none but natives should hold preferment of 
any kind and that all papal letters and bulls contravening this 
should be resisted in whatever way was necessary.® In Castile 
the Cértes of 1390 forcibly represented to Juan I the evils 
resulting from this foisting of strangers on the Spanish Church, 
but his speedy death prevented action. The remonstrance was 
renewed to the tutors of the young Henry III, who promptly 
placed an embargo on the revenues of foreign benefice-holders 
and forbade the admission of subsequent appointees. This led 
to a compromise, in 1393, by which the Avignonese curia secured 
the recognition of existing incumbents by promising that no 
more such nominations should be made.* The promise made 
by the Avignonese antipope was not binding on the Roman 
curia and the quarrel continued. Even if the recipient was a 
native there was little ceremony in dealing with papal grants of 
benefices when occasion prompted, as was shown in the affair 


1 Romancero del Cid, pp. 245, 269 (Francofurto, 1828). 

? Ordenanzas Reales, Lib. v1, Tit. ix, ley 21.—Villanueva, Viage Literario, 
XVII, 256. 

* Constitutions de Cathalunya, Lib. 1, Tit. v, cap. 1 (Barcelona, 1588, p. 18). 
Similar laws adopted in 1534 and 1537 show that meanwhile it had been impos- 
sible to prevent papal encroachments.—Ib. cap. 3, 4. 

* Ayala, Crénica de Don Juan I, afio x, cap. vii—Crénica de Don Enrique III, 
afio III, cap. xvi. 


Cuap. I] DISREGARD OF THE PAPACY 13 


which first revealed the unbending character of the future Car- 
dinal Ximenes. During his youthful sojourn in Rome Ximenes 
procured papal ‘‘expectative letters” granting him the first 
preferment that should fall vacant in the diocese of Toledo. On 
his return he made use of these letters to take possession of the 
arciprestazgo of Uceda, but it happened that Archbishop Carrillo 
simultaneously gave it to one of his creatures and, as Ximenes 
refused to surrender his rights, he was thrown into a tower in 
Uceda—a tower he subsequently, when himself Archbishop of 
Toledo, used as a treasury. As he continued obstinate, Carrillo 
transferred him to the Pozo de Santorcas, a harsh dungeon 
used for clerical malefactors, where he lay for six years, resolutely 
refusing to abandon his claim, until released at the intercession 
of the wife of a nephew of Carrillo." Evidently the Castilian 
prelates had slender respect for papal diplomas. About the 
same time, during the civil war between Henry IV and his 
brother Alfonso, when Hernando de Luxan, Bishop of Sigiienza, 
died, the dean, Diego Lépez, obtained possession of the castles 
and the treasure of the see, joined the party of Alfonso, and, 
with the aid of Archbishop Carrillo, caused himself to be elected 
bishop. Meanwhile Paul II gave the see to Juan de Maella, 
Cardinal-bishop of Zamora, but Diego Lépez refused to obey the 
bulls and appealed to the future council against the pope and 
all his censures. He disregarded an interdict launched against 
him and was supported by all his clergy. Maella died and Paul 
II gave the bishopric to the Bishop of Calahorra, requesting 
Henry IV to place him in possession. So secure did Diego Lépez 
feel that he rejected a compromise offering him the see of Zamora 
in exchange, but the possession of Sigiienza happened to be of 
importance in the war; by bribery a troop of royalist soldiers 
obtained admittance to the castle and carried off Lépez as a 
prisoner.’ 

It was the same even with so pious a monarch as Ferdinand 
the Catholic. When, in 1476, the archiepiscopal see of Saragossa 
became vacant by the death of Juan of Aragon, Ferdinand, with 
his father, Juan II, asked Sixtus IV to appoint his natural son, 
Alfonso, a child six years of age. The claim of the papacy to 
archiepiscopal appointments, based on the necessity of the 


* Alvar Gomez, De Rebus gestis a Francisco Ximenio, fol. 3 (Compluti, 1569). 
—Robles, Vida del Cardenal Ximenes, pp. 38-41. 
? Castillo, Crénica de Enrique IV, cap. ev. 


14 THE CASTILIAN MONARCHY [Boox I 


pallium, was of ancient date and had become incontestable. In 
the thirteenth century Alfonso X had admitted it in the case of 
the archbishops, but when Isabella appointed Ximenes to the 
see of Toledo in 1495 the proceedings showed that the post was 
considered to be in the gift of the crown and the papal confirma- 
tion to be a matter of course.* So in the present case the request 
was a mere form, as was seen when Sixtus refused. The defect 
of birth could be dispensed for, but the youth of Alfonso was an 
insuperable objection, and Sixtus appointed Ansias Dezpuch, 
then Archbishop of Monreal, thinking that the services ren- 
dered by him and by his uncle, the Master of the Order of Mon- 
tesa, would induce the king to assent. Dezpuch accepted, but 
Ferdinand at once sequestrated all the revenues of Monreal and 
the priory of Santa Cristina and ordered him to resign. On his 
hesitating, Ferdinand threatened to seize all the castles and 
revenues of the mastership of Montesa, which was effectual, 
and Sixtus compromised by making the boy perpetual admin- 
istrator of Saragossa.’ 

Isabella, despite her piety, was as firm as her husband in 
defending the claim of the crown in these matters against the 
papacy. When, in 1482, the see of Cuenca became vacant and 
Sixtus IV appointed a Genoese cousin to the position, Ferdinand 
and his queen energetically represented that only Spaniards 
should have Spanish bishoprics and that the selection should be 
made by them. Sixtus retorted that all benefices were in the gift 
of the pope and that his power, derived from God, was unlimited, 
whereupon they ordered home all their subjects resident in the 
papal court and threatened to take steps for the convocation 
of a general council. These energetic proceedings brought Sixtus 
to terms and he sent to Spain a special nuncio, but Ferdinand 
and Isabella stood on their dignity and refused even to receive 
him. Then the Cardinal of Spain, Pero Gonzdlez de Mendoza, 
intervened and, on Sixtus withdrawing his pretensions, they 
allowed themselves to be reconciled.2 They alleged that what- 


1 Memorial histdérico espafiol, T. I, p. 236; II, 22, 25.—Gomez de Rebus gestis 
a Fran. Ximenio, fol. 9-11. 

? Zurita, Afiales de Aragon, Lib. xx, cap. xxii—Mariana, Historia de Espafia, 
Lib. XXIV, cap. XVIl. 

3 Pulgar, Crénica de los Reyes Catolicos, Lib. 11, cap. civ. 

The right as to bishoprics was finally conceded in 1523 to Charles V by Adrian 
VI (Mariana, Lib. xxv1, cap. 5). 


CHap. I] ECCLESIASTICAL JURISDICTION LIMITED 15 


ever might be the papal rights in other countries, in Spain the 
patronage of all benefices belonged to the crown because they 
and their predecessors had wrested the land from the infidel. 
So jealous, indeed, were they of the papal encroachments that 
among the subjects which they submitted to the national synod 
assembled by them in Seville, June, 1478, was how to prevent 
the residence of papal legates and nuncios, who not only carried 
off much money from the kingdom, but threatered the royal 
pre-eminence, to which the synod replied that this rested with 
the sovereigns to do as their predecessors had done.’ It is easy 
thus to understand why, in the organization of the Inquisition, 
they insisted that all appointments should be made by the throne. 

In other ways the much-prized superiority of the canon over 
secular law was disregarded in Spain. The Cortes and the mon- 
arch had never hesitated to legislate on ecclesiastical affairs, 
and the jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical courts was limited with 
a jealousy which paid scant respect to canon and decretal. 
Nothing, for instance, was better settled than the spiritual 
cognizance of all matters respecting testaments, yet when, in 
1270, the authorities of Badajoz complained of the interference 
of the bishop’s court with secular judges in such affairs, pro- 
ceeding to the excommunication of those who exercised juris- 
diction over them, Alfonso X expressed surprise and gave 
explicit commands that such cases should be decided by the lay 
courts exclusively.’ So little respect was felt for the immunity 
of ecclesiastics from secular law, in defence of which Thomas 
a Becket had laid down his life, that, as late as 1351, an ordena- 
miento of Pedro the Cruel concedes to them that they shall not 
be cited before secular judges except in accordance with law.* 
On the other hand, laymen were jealously protected from the 
ecclesiastical courts. The crown was declared to be the sole 
judge of its own jurisdiction, and no appeal from it was allowed. 
In the exercise of this supreme power laws were repeatedly 
enacted providing that a layman, who should cite another lay- 
man before a spiritual judge, not only lost his cause but incurred 
a heavy fine and disability for public office. The spiritual judge 


1 Francisco de Medina, Vida del Cardenal de Mendoza (Memorial histérico 
espafiol, T. VI, p. 244). 

2 Boletin de la R. Acad. de la Historia, T. XXII, pp. 220, 227. 

3 Coleccion de Privilegios etc. T. VI, p. 117 (Madrid, 1833). 

* Archivo de Sevilla, Seccion primera, Carpeta rv, fol. 85, 2 3 (Sevilla, 1860). 


16 THE CASTILIAN MONARCHY [Boox I 


could not imprison a layman or levy execution on his property, 
and he who attempted it or any other invasion of the royal 
jurisdiction forfeited his benefices and became a stranger in the 
kingdom, thus rendering him incapable of preferment. The 
ecclesiastic who cited a layman before a spiritual judge lost any 
privileges or graces which he might hold of the crown. The lay- 
man who attempted to remove a cause from a lay court to a 
spiritual one was punished with confiscation of all his property, 
while any vassal who claimed benefit of clergy and declined the 
jurisdiction of a royal court forfeited his fief. In re-enacting 
these laws in the Cértes of Toledo, in 1480, Ferdinand and Isa- 
bella complained of their inobservance and ordered their strict 
enforcement.’ No other nation in Christendom dared thus to 
infringe on the sacred limits of spiritual jurisdiction. 

Yet even this was not all, for the secular power asserted its 
right to intervene in matters within the Church itself. Else- 
where the ineradicable vice of priestly concubinage was left to 
be dealt with by bishops and archdeacons. The guilty priests 
themselves, even in Castile, were exempt from civil authority, 
but Ferdinand and Isabella had no hesitation in invading their 
domiciles and, by repeated edicts in 1480, 1491, 1502, and 1503, 
endeavored to cure the evil by fining, scourging, and banishing 
their partners in sin.” It is true, as we have seen above, that 
these laws were eluded, but there was at. least a vigorous attempt 
to enforce them for, in 1490, the clergy of Guipuzcoa complained 
that the officers of justice visited their houses to see whether 
they kept concubines (which of course they denied) and carried 
off their women to prison, where they were forced to confess 
themselves conctbines, to the great dishonor of the Church, 
whereupon the sovereigns repressed the excessive zeal of their 
officials and ordered them in future to interfere only when the 
concubinage was notorious.* A yet more significant extension 
of royal authority was exercised when, in 1490, the people of 
Lequeitio (Biscay) complained that, though there were twelve 
mass-priests in the parish church, they all celebrated together and 
at uncertain times, so that the pious were unable to be present. 
This was a matter belonging exclusively to the diocesan authority, 


* Ordenanzas Reales, Lib. 1, Tit. i, leyes 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10—Novis. Recop. 
Lib. rv, Tit. i, leyes 3, 4, 5. 

* Novisima Recop. Lib. xn, Tit. xxvi, leyes 3-5. 

* Coleccion de Cédulas, III, 113 (Madrid, 1829) 


Cuap. I] ECCLESIASTICAL IMMUNITY By 


yet the appeal was made to the crown, and the Royal Council felt 
no scruple in ordering the priests to celebrate in succession and 
at reasonable hours, under pain of banishment and forfeiture of 
temporalities, thus disregarding even the imprescriptible immu- 
nities of the priesthood.* So slender, indeed, was the respect 
paid to these immunities that the Council of Aranda, in 1473, 
complained that magistrates of cities and other temporal lords 
presumed to banish ecclesiastics holding benefices in cathedral 
churches, and it may well be doubted whether the interdict 
with which the council threatened to punish this infraction of 
the canons was effective in its suppression.’ 

One of the most deplorable abuses with which the Church 
afflicted society was the admission into the minor orders of 
crowds of laymen who, without abandoning worldly pursuits, 
adopted the tonsure in order to enjoy the irresponsibility afforded 
by the claim acquired to spiritual jurisdiction, whether as crimin- 
als or as traders. The Cortes of Tordesillas, in 1401, declared that 
the greater portion of the rujfianes and malefactors of the king- 
dom wore the tonsure; when arrested by the secular officials the 
spiritual courts demanded them and enforced their claims with 
excommunication, after which they freely discharged the evil 
doers. This complaint was re-echoed by almost every subse- 
quent Cértes, with an occasional allusion to the stimulus thus 
afforded to the evil propensities of those who were really clerics. 
The kings in responding to these representations could only say 
that they would apply to the Holy Father for relief, but the 
relief never came.*® The spirit in which these claims of clerical 
immunity were advanced as a shield for criminals and the reso- 
lute firmness with which they were met by Ferdinand and Isa- 
bella are illustrated by an occurrence in 1486, in Truxillo, where 
a man committed a crime and was arrested by the corregidor. 
He claimed to wear the tonsure and, as the officials delayed in 
handing him over to the ecclesiastical court, some clerics who 
were his kinsmen paraded the streets with a cross and pro- 
claimed that religion was being destroyed. They succeeded 
thus in arousing a tumult in which the culprit was liberated. 
The sovereigns were in Galicia, but they forthwith despatched 


? Coleccion de Cédulas, I, 246. 
? Concil. Arandens. ann. 1473, cap. xxiv (Aguirre, V, 350). 
3 Cértes de Leon y de Castilla, II, 539; III, 33, 57, 122, 172, 192-6, 287, 328, 
408. 
2 


18 THE CASTILIAN MONARCHY [Boox I 


troops to the scene of disturbance; severe punishment was 
inflicted on the participants in the riot, and the clerics who had 
provoked it were deprived of citizenship and were banished 
from Spain.’ Less serious but still abundantly obnoxious were 
the advantages which these tonsured laymen possessed in civil 
suits by claiming the privilege of ecclesiastical jurisdiction. 
To meet this was largely the object of the laws in the Ordenanzas 
Reales described above, and these were supplemented, in 1519, 
by an edict of Charles V forbidding episcopal. officials from 
cognizance of cases where such so-called clerics engaged in trade 
sought the spiritual courts as a defence against civil suits. A 
similar abuse, by which such clerics in public office evaded respon- 
sibility for wrong-doing by pleading their clergy, he remedied 
by reviving an old law of Juan I declaring them ineligible to 
office? Thus the royal power in Spain asserted its authority 
over the Church after a fashion unknown elsewhere. We shall 
see that, so long as it declined to persecute Moors and Jews, 
Rome could not compel it to do so. When its policy changed 
under Isabella it was inevitable that the machinery of persecu- 
tion should be under the control, not of the Church, but of the 
sovereign. We shall alsosee that, when the Inquisition inflicted 
similar wrongs by the immunities claimed for its own officials 
and familiars, the sovereigns customarily turned a deaf ear to 
the complaints of the people. 


Such was the condition of Castile when the death of the miser- 
able Henry IV, December 12, 1474, cast the responsibility of 
royalty on his sister Isabella and her husband, Ferdinand of 
Aragon. The power of the crown was eclipsed; the land was 
ravaged with interminable war between nobles who were prac- 
tically independent; the sentiment of loyalty and patriotism 
seemed extinct; deceit and treachery, false oaths—whatever 
would serve cupidity and ambition—were universal; justice 
was bought and sold; private vengeance was exercised without 
restraint; there was no security for life and property. The fabric 
of society seemed about to fall in ruins. To evolve order out 


1 Pulgar, Crénica, 111, Ixvi. 

? Coleccion de Cédulas, II, 49, 50 (Madrid, 1829). 

* La Puente, Epit. de la Crénica de Juan II, Lib. v, cap. xxxiii.—L. Marinei 
Siculi de Rebus Hispan. Lib. xrx.—Pulgar, Crénica, P. u, cap. lii—Bernaldez, 
Historia de los Reyes Catélicos, cap. i (Sevilla, 1869). 


Cuap, I] DISPUTED SUCCESSION 19 


of this chaos of passion and lawlessness was a task to test to 
the uttermost the nerve and capacity of the most resolute and 
sagacious. To add to the confusion there was a disputed suc- 
cession, although, in 1468, the oath of fidelity had been taken to 
Isabella, with the assent of Henry IV, in the Contract of Perales, 
by which he, for the second time, acknowledged his reputed 
daughter Juana not to be his. He was popularly believed to be 
impotent, and when his wife Juana, sister of Affonso V of Por- 
tugal, bore him a daughter, whom he acknowledged and de- 
clared to be his heir, her paternity was maliciously ascribed to 
Beltran de la Cueva, and she was known by the opposite party 
as La Beltraneja. Though Henry had been forced by his nobles 
to set aside her claims in favor of his brother Alfonso in the 
Declaration of Cabezon, in 1464, and, after Alfonso’s death, in 
favor of Isabella, in 1468, the latter’s marriage, in 1469, with 
Ferdinand of Aragon so angered him that he betrothed Juana 
to Charles Duke of Guienne, brother of Louis XI of France, 
and made the nobles of his faction swear to acknowledge her. 
At his death he testified again to her legitimacy and declared 
her to be his successor in a will which long remained hidden and 
finally in 1504 fell under the control of Ferdinand, who ordered 
it burnt... There was a powerful party pledged to support her 
rights, and they were aided on the one hand by Affonso of Por- 
tugal and on the other by Louis of France, each eager to profit 
by dismembering the unhappy land. Some years of war, more 
cruel and bloody than even the preceding aimless strife, were 
required to dispose of this formidable opposition—years which 
tried to the utmost the ability of the young sovereigns and 
proved to their subjects that at length they had rulers endowed 
with kingly qualities. The decisive victory of Toro, won by 
Ferdinand over the Portuguese, March 1, 1476, virtually settled 
the result, although the final treaty was not signed until 1479. 
The Beltraneja was given the alternative of marrying within 
six months Prince Juan, son of Ferdinand and Isabella, then 
but two years old, or of entering the Order of Santa Clara in a 
Portuguese house. She chose the latter, but she never ceased 
to sign herself Yo la Reina, and her pretensions were a frequent 
source of anxiety. She led a varied life, sometimes treated as 


1 Galindez de Carvajal (Coleccion de Documentos para la Historia de Espaiia, 
XVIII, 254). 


20 THE CASTILIAN MONARCHY [Boox I 


queen, with a court around her, and sometimes as a nun in her 
convent, dying at last in 1531, at the age of seventy.’ 

Isabella was queen in fact as well as in name. Under the © 
feudal system, the husband of an heiress was so completely lord 
of the fief that, in the Capitulations of Cervera, January 7, 1469, 
which preceded the marriage, the Castilians carefully guarded 
the autonomy of their kingdom and Ferdinand swore to observe 
the conditions.” Yet, on the death of Henry IV, he imagined 
that he could disregard the compact, alleging that the crown of 
Castile passed to the nearest male descendant, and that through 
his grandfather, Ferdinand of Antequera, brother of Henry III, 
he was the lawful heir. The position was, however, too doubtful 
and complicated for him to insist on this; a short struggle con- 
vineced his consummate prudence that it was wisdom to yield, 
and Isabella’s wifely tact facilitated submission. It was agreed 
that their two names should appear on all papers, both their 
heads on all coins, and that there should be a single seal with 
the arms of Castile and Aragon. Thereafter they acted in con- 
cert which was rarely disturbed. The strong individuality 
which characterized both conduced to harmony, for neither 
of them allowed courtiers to gain undue influence. As Pulgar 
says ‘‘The favorite of the king is the queen, the favorite of the 
queen is the king.’” 

Ferdinand, without being a truly great man, was unquestion- 
ably the greatest monarch of an age not prolific in greatness, the 
only contemporary whom he did not wholly eclipse being Henry 
VII of England. Constant in adversity, not unduly elated in 
prosperity, there was a stedfast equipoise in his character which 
more than compensated for any lack of brilliancy. Far-seeing 
and cautious, he took no decisive step that was not well pre- 
pared in advance but, when the time came, he could strike, 
promptly and hard. Not naturally cruel, he took no pleasure 


+ Zurita, Afiales de Aragon, Lib. xvi, cap. 20, 21.—Castillo, Crénica de 
Enrique IV, cap. exxiv.—Valera, Memorial de diversas Hazafias, cap. xx.— 
Pulgar, Crénica P. 1, cap. ii; P. 1, cap. xci.—Maldonado, Hechos de Don Alonso 
de Monrrey (Mem. hist. espafiol, T. VI, p. 94).—Barrantes, Ilustraciones de la 
Casa de Niebla, Lib. vim, cap. xxi. 

* Castillo, Crénica de Enrique IV, cap. exxxviii—Clemencin, Elégio de la 
Reina Isabel, Append. I. 

* Pulgar, Cronica, P. 1, cap. ii; Letra xiii—L. Marini Siculi de Reb. Hisp. 
Lib. xrx. 


Cuar. I] FERDINAND’S CHARACTER 21 


in human suffering, but he was pitiless when his policy demanded. 
Dissimulation and deceit are too invariable an ingredient of 
statecraft for us to censure him severely for the craftiness in 
which he surpassed his rivals or for the mendacity in which he 
was an adept. Cold and reserved, he preferred to inspire fear 
rather than to excite affection, but he was well served and his 
insight into character gave him the most useful faculty of a 
ruler, the ability to choose his instruments and to get from them 
the best work which they were capable of performing, while 
gratitude for past services never imposed on him any incon- 
venient obligations. He was popularly accused of avarice, 
but the empty treasury left at his death showed that acquisi- 
tiveness with him had been merely a means to an end.’ His 
religious convictions were sincere and moreover he recognized 
wisely the invaluable aid which religion could lend to statesman- 
ship at a time when Latin Christianity was dominant without. 
a rival. This was especially the case in the ten years’ war with 
Granada, his conduct of whichwould alone stamp him as a leader 
of men. The fool-hardy defiance of Abu-l-Hacan when, in 1478, 
he haughtily refused to resume payment of the tribute which 
for centuries had been imposed on Granada, and when, in 1481, 
he broke the existing truce by surprising Zahara, was a for- 
tunate occurrence which Ferdinand improved to the utmost. 
The unruly Castilian nobles had been reduced to order, but they 
chafed under the unaccustomed restraint. By giving their 
warlike instincts legitimate employment in a holy cause, he was: 
securing internal peace; by leading his armies personally, he 
was winning the respect of his Castilian subjects who hated him 
as an Aragonese, and he was training them to habits of obedience. 
By making conquests for the crown of Castile he became natural- 
ized and was no longer a foreigner. It was more than a hundred 
years since a King of Castile had led his chivalry to victory over 
the infidel, and national pride and religious enthusiasm were 
enlisted in winning for him the personal authority necessary 
for a sovereign, which had been forfeited since the murder of 
Pedro the Cruel had established the bastard line upon the throne. 
It was by such means as this, and not by the Inquisition that 


1 Machiavelli’s judgement was as usual correct when he remarked (Il Principe, 
cap. xvi) “Il Re di Spagna presente se fusse tenuto liberale non avrebbe fatto 
né vinto tante imprese.” 


29 THE CASTILIAN MONARCHY [Boox I 


he started the movement which converted feudal Spain into an 
absolute monarchy. His life’s work was seen in the success 
with which, against heavy odds, he lifted Spain from her obscurity 
in Europe to the foremost rank of Christian powers. 

Yet amid the numerous acts of cruelty and duplicity which 
tarnish the memory of Ferdinand as a statesman, examination 
of his correspondence with his officials of the Inquisition, espe- 
cially with those employed in the odious business of confiscating 
the property of the unhappy victims, has revealed to me an 
unexpectedly favorable aspect of his character. While urging 
them to diligence and thoroughness, his instructions are invari- 
ably to decide all cases with rectitude and justice and to give no 
one cause of complaint. While insisting on the subordination 
of the people and the secular officials to the Holy Office, more 
than once we find him intervening to check arbitrary action and 
to correct abuses and, when cases of peculiar hardship arising 
from confiscations are brought to his notice, he frequently grants 
to widows and orphans a portion of the forfeited property. All 
this will come before us more fully hereafter and a single instance 
will suffice here to illustrate his kindly disposition to his sub- 
jects. In a letter of October 20, 1502, he recites that Domingo 
Mufioz of Calatayna has appealed to him for relief, representing 
that his little property was burdened with an annual censal or 
ground-rent of two sols eight dineros—part of a larger one con- 
fiscated in the estate of Juan de Buendia, condemned for heresy 
—and he orders Juan Royz, his receiver of confiscations at Sara- 
gossa, to release the ground-rent and let Mufioz have his property 
unincumbered, giving as a reason that the latter is old and poor.’ 
It shows Ferdinand’s reputation among his subjects that such 
an appeal should be ventured, and the very triviality of the matter 
renders it the more impressive that a monarch, whose ceaseless 
personal activity was devoted to the largest affairs of that 
tumultuous world, should turn from the complicated treachery 
of European politics to consider and grant so humble a prayer. 

In his successful career as a monarch he was well seconded 
by his queen. Without deserving the exaggerated encomiums 
which have idealized her, Isabella was a woman exactly adapted 
to her environment. As we have seen, the muger varonil was 
a not uncommon development of the period in Spain, and Isa- 


* Archivo Gen. de Simancas, Consejo de la Inquisicion, Libro II, fol. 22 


Cuap. I] ISABELLA 23 


bella’s youth, passed in the midst of civil broils, with her fate 
more than once suspended in the balance, had strengthened 
and hardened the masculine element in her character. Self- 
reliant and possessed of both moral and physical courage, she 
was prompt and decided, bearing with ease responsibilities that 
would have crushed a weaker nature and admirably fitted to 
cope with the fierce and turbulent nobles, who respected neither 
her station nor her sex and could be reduced to obedience only 
by a will superior to their own. She had the defects of her quali- 
ties. She could not have been the queen she was without sacri- 
fice of womanly softness, and she earned the reputation of being 
hard and unforgiving.’ She could not be merciful when her 
task was to reduce to order the wild turmoil and lawlessness 
which had so long reigned unchecked in Castile, but in this she 
shed no blood wantonly and she knew how to pardon when 
policy dictated mercy. How she won the affection of those in 
whom she confided can be readily understood from the feminine 
grace of her letters to her confessor, Hernando of Talavera.” A 
less praiseworthy attribute of her sex was her fondness for per- 
sonal adornment, in which she indulged in spite of a chronically 
empty treasury and a people overwhelmed with taxation. We 
hear of her magnifying her self-abnegation in receiving the French 
ambassador twice in the same gown, while an attaché of the 
English envoy says that he never saw her twice in the same 
attire, and that a single toilet, with its jewels and appendages 
must have cost at least 200,000 crowns.’ She was moreover 
rigidly tenacious of the royal dignity. Once when Ferdinand 
was playing cards with some grandees, the Admiral of Castile, 
whose sister was Ferdinand’s mother, addressed him repeatedly 
as ‘‘nephew’’; Isabella was undressed in an inner room and 
heard it; she hastily gathered a garment around her, put her 
head through the door and rebuked him—‘‘ Hold! my lord the 


1 “Con gran dificultad perdonava los yerros que se le hazian.’’—Barrantes, 
Tlustraciones ete., Lib. vii, cap. xii. 

* Palafox y Mendoza, Obras, T. VII, p. 333 (Madrid, 1762).—Ochoa, Epis- 
tolario Espaifiol, II, 14. 

3 Bergenroth, Calendar of Spanish State Papers, I, xxxiv-v. The value of the 
gold crown of the period was 4s. 6d. sterling (Ibid. p. 4) and 200,000 scudos was 
the marriage-portion of Katharine of Aragon when wedded to Prince Arthur of 
England (Ibid. p. Ixiv), which is the equivalent of about £500,000 of modern 
money. For the oppression of the people see Gonzalo de Ayora (Boletin de la 
R. Acad., XVII, 447-8). Cf. Clemencin, p. 185. 


o4 THE CASTILIAN MONARCHY [Boox I 


king has no kindred or friends, he has servants and vassals.’” 


She was deeply and sincerely religious, placing almost unbounded 
confidence in her spiritual directors, whom she selected, not 
among courtly casuists to soothe her conscience, but from among 
the most rigid and unbending churchmen within her reach, 
and to this may in part be attributed the fanaticism which led 
her to make such havoc among her people. She was scrupu- 
lously regular in all church observances; in addition to frequent 
prayers she daily recited the hours like a priest, and her biogra- 
pher tells us that, in spite of the pressing cares of state, she 
seemed to lead a contemplative rather than an active life.” She 
was naturally just and upright, though, in the tortuous policy of 
the time, she had no hesitation in becoming the accomplice of 
Ferdinand’s frequent duplicity and treachery. With all the 
crowded activity of her eventful life, she found time to stimulate 
the culture despised by the warlike chivalry around her, and 
she took a deep interest in an academy which, at her instance, 
was opened for the young nobles of her court by the learned 
Italian, Peter Martyr of Anghiera.’ 

Isabella recognized that the surest way to curb the disorders 
which pervaded her kingdom was the vigorous enforcement of 
the law and, as soon as the favorable aspect of the war of the 
succession gave leisure for less pressing matters, she set earnestly 
to work to accomplish it. The victory of Toro was followed 
immediately by the Cortes of Madrigal, April 27, 1476, where 
far-reaching reforms were enacted, among which the administra- 
tion of justice and the vindication of the royal prerogatives occu- 
pied a conspicuous place.* It was not long before she gave her 
people a practical illustration of her inflexible determination to 
enforce these reforms. In 1477 she visited Seville with her 
court and presided in public herself over the trial of malefactors. 
Complaints came in thick and fast of murders and robberies 
committed in the bad old times; the criminals were summarily 
dispatched, and a great fear fell upon the whole population, for 
there was scarce a family or even an individual who was not 
compromised. Multitudes fled and Seville bade fair to be de- 


’ From the Notables of Cristébal Nufiez, printed by Padre Fidel Fita in the 
Boletin, XVI, 561. 

2 L. Marine Siculi de Rebus Hisp. Lib. xx. 

> Pet. Martyr. Angler. Lib. v, Epist. exiv. 

* Colmeiro, Cértes de Leon y de Castilla, II, 43 sqq. 


Cuar. I] ROYAL JURISDICTION 25 


populated when, at the supplication of a great crowd, headed 
by Enrique de Guzman, Duke of Medina Sidonia, she pro- 
claimed an amnesty conditioned on the restitution of property, 
making, however, the significant exception of heresy.’ 

From Seville she went, accompanied by Ferdinand, to Cérdova. 
There they executed malefactors, compelled restitution of 
property, took possession of the castles of robber hidalgos, and 
left the land pacified. As opportunity allowed, in the busy years 
which followed, Isabella visited other portions of her dominions, 
from Valencia to Biscay and Galicia, on the same errand and, 
when she could not appear in person, she sent judges around 
with full power to represent the crown, the influence of which 
was further extended when, in 1480, the royal officers known as 
corregidores were appointed in all towns and cities.” One nota- 
ble case is recorded which impressed the whole nobility with 
salutary terror. In 1480 the widow of a scrivener appealed to 
her against Alvar Ydfiez, a rich caballero of Lugo in Galicia, 
who, to obtain possession of a coveted property, caused the 
scrivener to forge a deed and then murdered him to insure 
secrecy. It was probably this which led Ferdinand and Isabella 
to send to Galicia Fernande de Acufia as governor with an 
armed force, and Garci Lépez de Chinchilla as corregidor. 
Ydfiez was arrested and finally confessed and offered to pur- 
chase pardon with 40,000 ducats to be applied to the Moorish 
wars. Isabella’s counsellors advised acceptance of the tempting 
sum for so holy a cause, but her inflexible sense of justice rejected 
it; she had the offender put to death, but to prove her disinter- 
estedness she waived her claim to his forfeited estates and gave 
them to his children. Alvar Ydfiez was but a type of the law- 
less nobles of Galicia who, for a century, had been accustomed 
to slay and spoil without accountability to any one. So desperate 
appeared the condition of the land that when, in 1480, the deputies 
of the towns assembled to receive Acufia and Chinchilla they told 
them that they would have to have powers from the King of 
Heaven as well as from the earthly king to punish the evil doers 


1 Pulgar, Cronica, P. m1, cap. lxx.—AHl. Anton. Nebriss. Decad. 1, Lib. vii, 
cap. 6.—Barrantes, Ilustraciones etc. Lib. vu, cap. xv.—José Gestoso y Pérez, 
Los Reyes Catélicos en Sevilla (Sevilla, 1891).—Zufiiga, Afiales de Sevilla, ann. 
1477, n. 5. 

eePuivar, Cronica, PaAtipcap. Xcv. 


26 THE CASTILIAN MONARCHY [Boox I 


of the land. The example made of Ydiiez brought encourage- 
ment, but the work of restoring order was slow. Even in 1482 
the representatives of the towns of Galicia appealed to the 
sovereigns, stating that there had long been neither law nor 
justice there and begging that a justizia mayor be appointed, 
armed with full powers to reduce the land to order. They espe- 
cially asked for the destruction of the numerous castles of those 
who, having little land and few vassals to support them, lived 
by robbery and pillage, and with them they classed the fortified 
churches held by prelates. At the same time they represented that 
homicide had been so universal that, if all murderers were pun- 
ished, the greater part of the land would be ruined, and they 
suggested that culprits be merely made to serve at their own 
expense in the war with Granada.” With the support of the 
well-disposed, however, the royal power gradually made itself 
felt; they lent efficient support to the royal representatives; 
forty-six robber castles were razed and fifteen hundred robbers 
and murderers fled from the province, which became compara- 
tively peaceful and orderly—a change confirmed when, in 1486, 
Ferdinand and Isabella went thither personally to complete the 
work. Yet it was not simply by spasmodic effort that the pro- 
tection of the laws was secured for the population. Constant 
vigilance was exercised to see that the judges were strict and 
impartial. In 1485, 1488 and 1490 we hear of searching inves- 
tigations made into the action of all the corregidores of the 
kingdom to see that they administered justice without fear or 
favor. Juezes de Residencia, as they were called, armed with 
almost full royal authority, were dispatched to all parts of the 
kingdom, as a regular system, to investigate and report on the 
conduct of all royal officials, from governors down, with power 
to punish for injustice, oppression, or corruption, subject always 
to appeal in larger cases to the royal council, and the detailed 
instructions given to them show the minute care exercised over 
all details of administration. Bribery, also, which was almost 
universal in the courts, was summarily suppressed and all judges 
were forbidden to receive presents from suitors,? To maintain 


1 Ferreiro, Fueros Municipales de Santiago, II, 65 (Santiago, 1896). 

? Tbidem, II, 314. 

3 L. Marinei Siculi Lib. xrx, xx1.—Pulgar, Crénica, P. 1, cap. xxvii, lxxviii, 
xevi, xevii, xeviii; P. 1, cap. xxxix, lxvi, ce, exxvii.—Capitulos hechos por el 
rey y la reyna en Sevilla a ix de Junio de M. y d. (sine nota). 


Cuap. I] ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE 27 


constant watchfulness over them a secret service was organized 
of trustworthy inspectors who circulated throughout the land 
in disguise and furnished reports as to their proceedings and 
reputation.’ Attention, moreover, was paid to the confused 
jurisprudence of the period. Since the confirmation of the Siete 
Partidas of Alfonso X, in 1348, and the issue at the same time 
of the Ordenamiento de Alcald, there had been countless laws 
and edicts published, some of them conflicting and many that 
had grown obsolete though still legally in force. The greatest 
jurist of the day, Alfonso Diaz de Montalvo, was employed to 
gather from these into a code all that were applicable to ex- 
isting conditions and further to supplement their deficiencies, 
and this code, known as the Ordenanzas Reales, was accepted 
and confirmed by the Cortes of Toledo in 1480.’ This reconstruc- 
tion of Castilian jurisprudence was completed for the time when, 
in 1491, Montalvo brought out an edition of the Siete Partidas, 
noting what provisions had become obsolete and adding what 
was necessary of the more modern laws. The result of all these 
strenuous labors is seen in the admiring exclamation of Peter 
Martyr, in 1492, ‘‘Thus we have peace and concord, hitherto 
unknown in Spain. Justice, which seems to have abandoned 
other lands, pervades these kingdoms.’’* The inestimable benefits 
resulting from this are probably due more especially to Isabella. 

“Yet I have been led to the conviction that her share in the 
administration of her kingdom has been exaggerated. The 
chroniclers of the period were for the most part Castilians who 
would naturally seek to subordinate the action of the Aragonese 
intruder, and subsequent writers, in their eagerness to magnify 
the reputation of Isabella, have followed the example. In the 
copious royal correspondence with the officials of the Inquisi- 
tion the name of Isabella rarely appears. To those in Castile 
as in Aragon Ferdinand mostly writes in the first person singular, 
without even using the pluralis majestatis; the receiver of con- 
fiscations is mt receptor, the royal treasury 1s mz camera e fisco; 


1 Galindez de Carvajal (Coleccion de Documentos para la Historia de Espafie, 
XVIII, 236). ? Bernaldez, cap. xlii. 

$ Pet. Martyr. Angler. Lib. v, Epist. eviii. As Cardinal Ximenes says in his 
letter of advice to Cardinal Adrian as to the conduct of Charles V in taking 
possession of his inheritance, “ por lo qual fue ella tan poderosisima en su reyno, 
que todos del mayor 4 el menor temian virgam ferream de su justicia, y asi des- 
truy6 toda la tirannia.’”’ (Valladares, Semanario Eridito, XX, 237). 


28 THE CASTILIAN MONARCHY . [Boox I 


the Council of the Inquisition is mi consejo. In spite of the 
agreement of 1474, the signature Yo la Reina rarely appears 
alongside of Yo el Rey, and still rarer are Ferdinand’s allusions 
to la Serenissima Reina, m1 muy cara e muy amada muger, while 
in the occasional letters issued by Isabella during her husband’s 
absence, she is careful to adduce his authority as that of el Rey 
mi sefior.. It is scarce likely that this preponderance of Ferdi- 
nand was confined to directing the affairs of the Holy Office. 

There has been a tendency of late to regard the Inquisition 
as a political engine for the conversion of Spain from a medieval 
feudal monarchy to one of the modern absolute type, but this 
is an error. The change effected by Ferdinand and Isabella 
and confirmed by their grandson Charles V was almost wholly 
wrought, as it had been two centuries earlier in France, by the 
extension and enforcement of the royal jurisdiction, super- 
seding that of the feudatories.” In Castile the latter had virtually 
ceased to be an instrument of good during the long period of 
turbulence which preceded the accession of Isabella; something 
evidently was needed to fill the gap; the zealous and efficient 
administration of justice, which I have described, not only 
restored order to the community but went far to exalt the royal 
power, and, while it abased the nobles, it reconciled the people 
to possible usurpations which were so beneficent. In the con- 
solidation and maintenance of this no agency was so effective as 
the institution known as the Santa Hermandad. 


1 Archivo Gen. de Simancas, Inquisicion Libros 1, 11. 

? The limitations on the royal jurisdiction are exemplified by the unseemly 
contest at Alcald de Henares, in 1485-6, between Isabella and the Archbishop 
Gonzdlez de Mendoza, respecting her right to administer justice within his 
province. It lasted from December till the time for opening the campaign against 
Granada, when she removed to Cérdova without having established her claim. 
—Francisco de Medina, Vida del Cardenal Mendoza (Mem. hist. espafiol, 
VI, 264). 

Yet her jurisdiction was one of the points on which Isabella wisely insisted 
with the utmost firmness. To quote Cardinal Ximenes again—“ Ante todo la 
dicha Reyna cuidaba de defender su jurisdiccion Real, viendo que por ella los 
Reyes en Castilla se hacen mas poderosos y mas temidos de sus vasallos” (Valla- 
dares, Semanario Ertidito, XX, 238). When, in 1491, the royal court at Valla- 
dolid, presided over by Alonzo de Valdevielfo, Bishop of Leon, wrongfully 
allowed an appeal to Rome, she promptly dismissed the bishop and all the 
judges and replaced them with Juan Arias del Villar, Bishop of Oviedo, and 
other assessors.—Croénicon de Valladolid (Coleccion de Documentos para la His- 
toria de Espafia, XIII, 184—5).—Galindez de Carbajal (Ibid. XVIII, 278). 


Cuap. T] LA SANTA HERMANDAD 29 


Hermandades—brotherhoods or associations for the main- 
tenance of public peace and private rights—were no new thing. 
In the troubles of 1282, caused by the rebellion of Sancho IV 
against his father, the first idea of his supporters seems to have 
been the formation of such organizations.’ In these associa- 
tions, however, the police functions were subordinated to the 
political object of supporting the pretensions of Sancho IV and, 
recognizing their danger, he dissolved them as soon as he felt the 
throne assured to him. After his death, his widow the regent 
Dofia Marfa de Molina, organized them anew for the protection 
of her child, Fernando EV, and again in 1315, when she was a 
second time regent in the minority of her grandson, Alfonso XI 

The idea was a fruitful one and speedily came to be recognized 
as a potent instrumentality in the struggle with local disorder 
and violence. Perhaps the earliest Hermandad of a purely 
police character, similar to the later ones, was that entered into 
in 1302 between Toledo, Talavera and Villareal to repress the 
the robberies and murders committed by the Golfines in the 
district of Xara. Fernando IV not only confirmed the associa- 
tion but ordered the inhabitants to render it due assistance, 
and subsequent royal letters of the same purport were issued 
in 1303, 1309, 1312 and 1315. In 1386 Juan I framed a general 
law providing for the organization and functions of Hermandades, 
but if any were formed under it at the time they have left no 
traces of their activity. In 1418 this law was adopted as the 
constitution of one which organized itself in Santiago, but this 
accomplished little and, in 1421, the guilds and confraternities 
of the city united in another for mutual support and succor. 
There was, in fact, at this time, at least nominally, a general 
Hermandad, probably organized under the statute of Juan I 
and possessing written charters and privileges and customs and 
revenues, with full jurisdiction to try and condemn offenders. 
It commanded little respect, however, for it complained, in 
1418, to Juan II of interference with its revenues and work, in 


1 Memorial histérico espafiol, T. II, pp. 68, 72, 86, 94, 102. 

* Benavides, Memorias de Fernando IV, Coleccion Diplomatica, T. II, pp. 3, 
7, 46, 75, 81, 178 (Madrid, 1860).—Vicente Santamaria de Paredes, Curso de 
Derecho Politico, p. 509 (Madrid, 1883).—Cértes de los antiguos Reinos de Leon 
y Castilla, I, 247, 300 (Madrid, 1861). 

> Benavides, op. cit. II, 363. 

* Ferreiro, Fueros Municipales de Santiago, III, 44. 


30 THE CASTILIAN MONARCHY [Boox I 


response to which Juan vigorously prohibited all royal and local 
judges and officials from impeding the Hermandades in any 
manner. The continuity, nominal at least, of this with subsequent 
organizations is shown by the confirmation of this utterance 
by Juan II in 1423, by Ferdinand and Isabella in 1485, by Juana 
la Loca in 1512 and 1518, by Philip II in 1561, by Philip III in 
1601 and by Philip IV in 1621. In the increasing disorder of 
the times, however, it was impossible, at that period, to maintain 
the efficiency of the body. In 1443 an attempt was made to 
reconstruct it, but as soon as it endeavored to repress the law- 
less nobles and laid siege to Pedro Lopez de Ayala in Salvatierra 
its forces were cut to pieces and dispersed by Pedro Fernandez 
de Velasco.2, Some twenty years later, in 1465, when the dis- 
orders under Henry IV were culminating, another effort was 
made. The suffering people organized and taxed themselves to 
raise a force of 1800 horsemen to render the roads safe, and they 
endeavored to bring the number up to 3000. It was a popular 
movement against the nobles and the king hailed it as the work 
of God who was lifting up the humble against the great. He 
empowered them to administer justice without appeal except 
to himself, he told them that they had well earned the name of 
Santa Hermandad and he urged them earnestly to go forward in 
the good work. The attempt had considerable success for a 
time, but it soon languished and was dissolved for lack of the 
means required to carry it on.* Again, in 1473, there was 
another endeavor to form a Hermandad, but the anarchical 
forces were too dominant for its successful organization.‘ 

As soon as the victory of Toro, in March, 1476, gave promise 
of settled government, the idea of reviving the Hermandades 
occurred to Alfonso de Quintanilla, Contador Mayor, or Chief 
Auditor, of Ferdinand and Isabella. With their approval he 
broached the subject to leading citizens of the principal towns 
in Leon and Old Castile; deputies were sent to meet at Duefias 
and the project was debated. So many obstacles presented 


1 Coleccion de Privilegios, T. VI, p. 327 (Madrid, 1833). 

2 Cronica de Don Juan II, afio xxxvu, cap. i. 

3 Cértes de Leon y de Castilla, III, 795. 

* Castillo, Crénica de Don Enrique IV, cap. lxxxvii, xe.—Barrantes, Ilustra- 
ciones etc. Lib. vil, cap. xxvilil.—Garibay, Compendio Historial, Lib. xvm, cap. 
xxxi.—Coleccion de Cédulas, III, 103 (Madrid, 1829).—Bienvenido, Oliver y 
Ksteller (Boletin, XIV, 382). 


Cuap. I] LA SANTA HERMANDAD 31 


themselves that it would have been abandoned but for an 
eloquent argument by Quintanilla. His plan was adopted, 
but so fearful were the deputies that the taxes necessary for its 
maintenance might become permanent that they limited its 
duration to three years. Under the impulse of the sovereigns 
it rapidly took shape and was organized with the Duke of Villa- 
hermosa, natural brother of Ferdinand, at its head.’ No time 
was lost in extending it throughout the kingdoms, in spite of 
resistance on the part of those who regarded with well-founded 
apprehension not only its efficiency as a means of coercing male- 
factors but as a dangerous development of the royal power. 
Seville, for instance, recalcitrated and only yielded to a per- 
emptory command from Isabella in June, 1477.2 One of the 
reasons assigned, in 1507, by Ferdinand for assenting to the 
demoralizing arrangement under which the Archbishop of Com- 
postella resigned his see in favor of his natural son, was that he 
had received the royal judges and the Hermandad throughout 
his province, in opposition to the will of the nobles and gentry.’ 
When, in 1479, Alonso Carrillo and the Marquis of Villena made 
a final attempt to urge the King of Portugal to another invasion 
of Castile, one of the arguments advanced was the hatred enter- 
tained for Ferdinand and Isabella in consequence of the taxes 
levied to support the three thousand horsemen of the Herman- 
dad.* In some provinces the resistance was obstinate. In 1479 
we find Isabella writing to the authorities of Biscay, expressing 
surprise at the neglect of the royal orders and threatening 
condign punishment for further delay, notwithstanding which 
repeated commands were requisite, and it was not till 1488 that 
the stubborn Biscayans submitted, while soon afterward com- 
plaints came from Guipuzcoa that the local courts neutralized 
it by admitting appeals from its sentences.° It was in the same 
year that Ferdinand obtained from the Cértes of Saragossa 
assent to the introduction of the Hermandad in his kingdom 
of Aragon, but the Aragonese, always jealous of the royal power, 


1 Pulgar, Crénica, P. 11, cap. li—L. Marinewi Siculi de Reb. Hisp. Lib. xrx. 
—/#]. Anton. Nebriss. Decad. I, Lib. v1, cap. 1-3.—Garibay, Comp. Historial, 
Lib. xvim, cap. viii. | 

* Zufiiga, Afiales de Sevilla, ann. 1477, No. 1. 

’ Zurita, Hist. del Rey Hernando, Lib. vim, cap. V.—Galindez de Carvajal 
(Coleccion de Documentos para la Historia de Espafia, XVIII, 319). 

_* Barrantes, Ilustraciones etc. Lib. vii, cap. xx. 
® Coleccion de Cédulas, I, 70, 124, 143, 183; III, 103. 


29 THE CASTILIAN MONARCHY [Boox I 


chafed under it for, in December, 1493, Isabella, writing from 
Saragossa, expresses a fear that the Cértes may suppress it, 
though it is the only means of enforcing justice there, and in 
the Cortes of Mongon, in 1510, Ferdinand was obliged to approve 
a juero abolishing it and forbidding for the future anything of 
the kind to be established.*. In 1490 the independent kingdom 
of Navarre adopted the system and co-operated with its neigh- 
bors by allowing malefactors to be followed across the border 
and extraditing them when caught—even absconding debtors 
being thus tracked and surrendered.? The institution thus 
founded was watched with Isabella’s customary care. In 1483 
complaints arose of bribery and extortion, when she summoned 
a convention at Pinto of representatives from all the provinces, 
where the guilty were punished and abuses were reformed.° 
The Santa Hermandad thus formed a mounted military 
police which covered the whole kingdom, under the Duke of 
Villahermosa, who appointed the captains and summoned the 
force to any point where trouble was threatened. Each centre 
of population elected two alcaldes, one a gentleman and the 
other a tax-payer or commoner, and levied a tax to defray the 
expense of the organization. The alcaldes selected the quad- 
rilleros, or privates, and held courts which dispensed summary 
justice to delinquents, bound by no formalities and required to 
listen to no legal pleadings. Their decision was final, save an 
appeal to the throne; their jurisdiction extended over all crimes 
of violence and theft and they could inflict stripes, mutilation, 
or death by shooting with arrows. The quadrillero in pursuit 
of an offender was required to follow him for five leagues, rais- 
ing the hue and cry as he went, and joined by those of the coun- 
try through which he passed, who kept up the hunt until the 
fugitive was either caught or driven beyond the frontier.* 
Great as were the services of the Hermandad in repressing 
the turbulence of the nobles and rendering the roads safe, its 
cost was a source of complaint to the communities which de- 
frayed it. This was by no means small; in 1485 it was com- 


1 Pulgar, Crénica, P. 111, cap. xcev.—Palafox, Obras, VII, 338 (Madrid, 1762), 
—Fueros de Aragon, fol. 13 (Saragossa, 1624). 

? Coleccion de Cédulas, IV, 89. § Pulgar, Crénica, P. 111, cap. xii. 

* Novis. Recop. Tit. xxv, Lib. x11r.—Barrantes, Ilustraciones etc. Lib. vim, 
cap xili.—Coleccion de Cédulas, IV, 295.—See also the description of the per- 
fected system which excited the admiration of the Venetian ambassador, Paolo 
Tiepolo, in 1563 (Relazioni, Serie I, T. V, p. 21). 


Cua. I] LA SANTA HERMANDAD 33 


puted at 32,000,000 maravedis and subsequently it increased 
greatly; it was met by a tax of 18,000 maravedis on every hun- 
dred hearths and the money was not handled by the communi- 
ties but was paid to the crown.’ Nominally the organization 
was in their hands, but virtually it was controlled by the sover- 
elgns, and when, in 1498, Ferdinand and Isabella, with an appear- 
ance of generosity, relieved the taxpayers and assumed to meet 
the expenses from the royal revenues, although they left the 
election of the alcaldes and quadrilleros in the hands of the 
local populations, yet the result was inevitable in subjecting it 
still more closely to the crown.? The institution became perma- 
nent, and its modern development is seen in the guarda civil. 
None of the reforms of Ferdinand and Isabella was so efficient. 
in restoring order and none did more to centralize power. It 
was not only a rudimentary standing army which could be 
concentrated speedily to suppress disorder, but it carried the 
royal jurisdiction into every corner of the land and made the 
royal authority supreme everywhere. It was practically an 
alliance between the crown and the people against the cen- 
trifugal forces of feudalism, without which even the policy of 
Ferdinand and the iron firmness of Ximenes might have failed 
to win in the final struggle. When municipal independence 
likewise perished in the defeat of the Comunidades, the only 
power left standing in Spain was that of the throne, which thus. 
became absolute and all-pervading. The new absolutism was 
embodied in the self-effacing declaration of the Cortes of Valla- 
dolid, in 1523, to Charles V, that the laws and customs were 
subject to the king, who could make and revoke them at his 
pleasure, for he was the living law.* How immense was the 
revolution and how speedily accomplished is seen in the con- 
trast between the time when the Count of Benavente jeered at 
a royal safe-conduct and the people of Galicia scarce dared to. 
receive a royal commissioner, and some sixty years later when, 
in the unruly Basque provinces, the people of San Sebastian, in. 
1536, appealed to the Emperor Charles V to relieve them from 


1 Clemencin, p. 139. 

? Coleccion de Cédulas, IV, 136, 164, 173, 185, 336, 338; V, 669; VI, 425.— 
Novis Recop. Tit. xxxv, Lib. x11, ley 18. 

3 Cértes de los antiguos Reinos, IV, 356 (Madrid, 1882)—“ E las leyes e cos-- 
tunbres son sujetas alos Reys, que las pueden hazer e quitar a su voluntad, e- 
vuestra Alteza es ley viba e animada enlas tierras.’’ 

3 


34 THE CASTILIAN MONARCHY [Boox I 


local nuisances, and royal letters were gravely issued forbidding 
the butchers of that town from erecting new stalls or skinning 
cattle in the streets and restricting the latter operation to places 
duly assigned for the purpose.” Thus the crown had become 
absolute and its interposition could be invoked for the minutest 
details of local government. He reads history to little purpose 
who imagines that this was the work of the Inquisition. 

Another measure of no little importance in establishing the 
royal supremacy was the virtual incorporation in the crown of 
the masterships of the three great military Orders of Santiago, 
of Calatrava and of Alcdintara. Under Henry IV a Master of 
Santiago had been able to keep the whole kingdom in confusion, 
and the wealth and power of the others, although not so great, 
were sufficient to render their chiefs the equals of the highest 
nobles. From Innocent VIII, in 1489, Ferdinand procured a 
brief granting him for life the administration of all three; and 
in her will Isabella bequeathed to him an annual income of ten 
millions of maravedis from their revenues.” As Ferdinand’s 
death drew near, the Orders endeavored to be released from 
subjection, claiming that they could be governed only by their 
own members, but prudent care secured in time from Leo X 
the succession in the masterships to Charles V, who, after Leo’s 
death, made haste to obtain from Adrian VI a bull which 
annexed them in perpetuity to the crown.® 


It was impossible that a king so far-seeing and politic as Fer- 
dinand and a queen so pious as Isabella, when reducing to order 
the chaos which they found in Castile, should neglect the interest 
of the faith on which, according to medieval belief, all social 
order was based. There were in fact burning religious questions 
which, to sensitive piety, might seem even more urgent than 
protection to life and property. To comprehend the intricacy 
of the situation will require a somewhat extended retrospect into 
the relations between the several races occupying the Peninsula. 


1 Coleccion de Cédulas, IV, 333. 

? Mariana, Lib. xxvii, cap. xi; Tom. IX, Append. p. xix.—Giustiniani, His- 
torie degl’Ordini Militari, pp. 386, 425, 460 (Venezia, 1692). 

* Cartas de Ximenes de Cisneros, pp. 120, 131, 181 (Madrid, 1867).—Wadding, 
Annales Minorum, ann. 1516, n. 12.—Gachard, Correspondence entre Charles- 
Quint et Adrien VI, p. cxi (Bruxelles, 1859). 


CPA hla ber. lle 
THE JEWS AND THE MOORS. 


Tue influences under which human character can be modified, 
for good or for evil, are abundantly illustrated in the conversion 
of the Spaniards from the most tolerant to the most intolerant 
nation in Europe. Apologists may seek to attribute the hatred 
felt for Jews and Moors and heretics, in the Spain of the fifteenth 
and succeeding centuries, to an inborn peculiarity of the race— 
a cosa de Espafia which must be accepted as a fact and requires 
no explanation,’ but such facts have their explanation, and it is 
the business of the expositor of history to trace them to their 
Causes. 


The vicissitudes endured by the Jewish race, from the period 
when Christianity became dominant, may well be a subject of 
pride to the Hebrew and of shame to the Christian. The annals 
of mankind afford no more brilliant instance of steadfastness 
under adversity, of unconquerable strength through centuries 
of hopeless oppression, of inexhaustible elasticity in recuper- 
ating from apparent destruction, and of conscientious adherence 
to a faith whose only portion in this life was contempt and 
suffering. Nor does the long record of human perversity present 
a more damning illustration of the facility with which the evil 
passions of man can justify themselves with the pretext of duty, 
than the manner in which the Church, assuming to represent 
Him who died to redeem mankind, deliberately planted the 
seeds of intolerance and persecution and assiduously cultivated 
the harvest for nearly fifteen hundred years. It was in vain 
that Jesus on the cross had said ‘‘ Father, forgive them, for they 


* Thus Father Gams attributes the Spanish Inquisition to the national pecu- 
liarity of the Spaniard, who requires that the State should represent God on 
earth, and that Christianity should control all public life; he demands unity of 
faith and not freedom of faith. The Inquisition is an institution for which the 
‘Church has no responsibility.—P. Pius Gams, O. 8. B., Die Kirchengeschichte 
von Spanien, III, 1, 7, 8, 11, 12. 

(35 ) 


36 THE JEWS AND THE MOORS [Boox I 


know not what they do’’; it was in vain that St. Peter was re- 
corded as urging, in excuse for the Crucifixion, ‘‘And now, 
brethren, I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did also 
your rulers”; the Church taught that, short of murder, no 
punishment, no suffering, no obloquy was too severe for the 
descendants of those who had refused to recognize the Messiah, 
and had treated him as a rebel against human and divine author- 
ity. Under the canon law the Jew was a being who had scarce 
the right to existence and could only enjoy it under conditions 
of virtual slavery. As recently as 1581, Gregory XIII declared 
that the guilt of the race in rejecting and crucifying Christ only 
grows deeper with successive generations, entailing on its mem- 
bers perpetual servitude, and this authoritative assertion was 
embodied in an appendix to the Corpus Juris... When Paramo, 
about the same period, sought to justify the expulsion of the 
Jews from Spain in 1492, he had no difficulty in citing canons 
to prove that Ferdinand and Isabella could righteously have 
seized all their property and have sold their bodies into slavery.’ 
Man is ready enough to oppress and despoil his fellows and, 
when taught by his religious guides that justice and humanity 
are a sin against God, spoliation and oppression become the 
easiest of duties. It 1s not too much to say that for the infinite 
wrongs committed on the Jews during the Middle Ages, and 
for the prejudices that are even yet rife in many quarters, the 
Church is mainly if not wholly responsible. It is true that occa- 
sionally she lifted her voice in mild remonstrance when some 
massacre occurred more atrocious than usual, but these massa- 
cres were the direct outcome of the hatred and contempt which 
she so zealously inculeated, and she never took steps by punish- 
ment to prevent their repetition. Alonso de Espina merely 
repeats the currently received orthodox ethics of the subject 
when he tells us that to oppress the Jew is true kindness and 
piety, for when he finds that his impiety brings suffering he will 
be led to the fear of God and that he who makes another do 
right is greater in the sight of God than he who does right him- 
self.* 

In view of Spanish abhorrence of Jews and Saracens during 


1 Septimi Decretal. Lib. v, Tit. i, cap. 5. 
2 Paramo de Orig. Offic. 8. Inquisitionis, p. 164. 
3 Fortalicium Fidei, fol. 147b (Ed. 1494). 


Cuap. IT] DEVELOPMENT OF INTOLERANCE aL 


the last five or six centuries it is a fact worthy of note that the 
Spanish nations of the medieval period were the latest to yield 
to this impulsion of the Church. The explanation of this lies 
partly in the relations between the several races in the Penin- 
sula and partly in the independent attitude which Spain main- 
tained towards the Holy See and its indisposition to submit to 
the dictation of the Church. To appreciate fully the trans- 
formation which culminated in the establishment of the Inqui- 
sition, and to understand the causes leading to it, will require a 
brief review of the position occupied by the Jew and the Saracen 
towards the Church and the State. 


In the primitive Church there would seem to have been a 
feeling of equality, if not of cordiality, between Christian and 
Jew. Whenit was deemed necessary, in the Apostolic canons, 
to forbid bishops and priests and deacons, as well as laymen, 
from fasting or celebrating feasts with Jews, or partaking of 
their unleavened bread, or giving oil to their synagogues, or 
lighting their lamps, this argues that kindly intercourse between 
them was only to be restricted in so far as it might lead to re- 
ligious fellowship.* This kindly intercourse continued but, as 
the Church became mostly Gentile in its membership, the preju- 
dices existing against the Jew in the Gentile world gathered 
strength until there becomes manifest a tendency to treat him 
as an outcast. Early in the fourth century the council of Elvira, 
held under the lead of the uncompromising Hosius of Cérdova, 
forbade marriage between Christians and Jews, because there 
could be no society common to the faithful and the infidel; no 
farmer was to have his harvest blest by a Jew, nor was any one 
even to eat with him.” St. Augustin was not quite so rigid, 
for while he held it lawful to dissolve marriage between the 
Christian and the infidel, he argued that it was inexpedient.® 
St. Ambrose was one of the earliest to teach proscription when 
he reproved Theodosius the Great for the favor shown by him 
to Jews, who slew Christ and who deny God in denying his Son, 
and St. John Chrysostom improved on this by publicly preach- 
ing that Christians should hold no intercourse with Jews, whose 


1 Canon. Apostol. n. 69, 70. 

? Concil. Eliberitan. cap. 16, 49, 50, 78. 

3 §. August. de Adult. Conjug. Lib. 1, cap. xviii. 
4S. Ambros. Epist. xu, n. 26. 


38 THE JEWS AND THE MOORS [Boox I 


souls were the habitations of demons and whose synagogues 
were their playgrounds.’ The antagonism thus stimulated found 
its natural expression, in 415, in the turbulent city of Alexandria, 
where quarrels arose resulting in the shedding of Christian 
blood, when St. Cyril took advantage of the excitement by lead- 
ing a mob to the synagogues, of which he took possession, and 
then abandoned the property of the Jews to pillage and ex- 
pelled them from the city, which they had inhabited since its 
foundation by Alexander.” That under such impulsion these 
excesses were common is shown by the frequent repetition of 
imperial edicts forbidding the maltreatment of Jews and the 
spoiling and burning of their synagogues; they were not allowed 
to erect new ones but were to be maintained in possession of 
those existing. At the same time the commencement of legal 
disabilities is manifested in the reiterated prohibitions of the 
holding of Christian slaves by Jews, while confiscation and 
perpetual exile or death were threatened against Jews who 
should convert or circumcise Christians or marry Christian 
wives.2. The Church held it to be a burning disgrace that a Jew 
should occupy a position of authority over Christians; in 438 
it procured from Theodosius II the enactment of this as a fixed 
principle, and we shall see how earnestly it labored to render 
this a part of the public law of Christendom.* This spirit re- 
ceived a check from the Arianism of the Gothic conquerors of 
the Western Empire. Theodoric ordered the privileges of the 
Jews to be strictly preserved, among which was the important 
one that all quarrels between themselves should be settled by 
their own judges, and he sternly repressed all persecution. When 
a mob in Rome burned a synagogue he commanded the punish- 
ment of the perpetrators in terms of severe displeasure; when 
attempts were made to invade the right of the Jews of Genoa 
he intervened effectually, and when in Milan the clergy en- 
deavored to obtain possession of the synagogue he peremptorily 


1 §. Joh. Chrysost. adv. Judzos Orat. 1, n. 3, 4, 6. Chrysostom’s indignation 
was especially aroused by the popular belief among Christians in the peculiar 
sanctity of the synagogues, which rendered oaths taken in them more binding 
than in a church. 

2 Socrat. H. E. vit, xiii. 

® Lib. xvi, Cod. Theodos. Tit. viii, Ll. 6, 9, 12, 21, 22, 25, 26, 27; Tit. ix, LE 
ya be ky 

* Novell. Theodos. II, Tit. iii. 


Cuap. IT] PROGRESSIVE INTOLERANCE 39 


forbade it. So long as the Wisigoths remained Arian this spirit 
prevailed throughout their extensive dominions, although the 
orthodox were allowed to indulge their growing uncharitable- 
ness. When the council of Agde, in 506, forbade the faithful to 
banquet or even to eat with Jews it shows that social intercourse 
still existed but that it was condemned by those who ruled the 
Church.’ In the East the same tendency had freer opportunity 
of expressing itself in legislation, as when, in 706, the council 
of Constantinople forbade Christians to live with Jews or to 
bathe with them, to eat their unleavened bread, to consult them 
as physicians or to take their medicines.® 

Gregory the Great was too large-minded to approve of this 
growing spirit of intolerance and, when some zealots in Naples 
attempted to prevent the Jews from celebrating their feasts, he 
intervened with a peremptory prohibition of such interference, 
arguing that it would not conduce to their conversion and that 
they should be led by kindness and not by force to embrace the 
faith, all of which was embodied in the canon law to become 
conspicuous through its non-observance.* In fact, his repeated 
enunciation of the precept shows how little it was regarded 
even.in his own time.’ When, moreover, large numbers of Jews 
were compelled to submit to baptism in southern Gaul he wrote 
reprovingly to the Bishops Virgil of Arles and Theodore of 
Marseilles, but this did not prevent St. Avitus of Clermont, 
about the same time, from baptizing about five hundred, who 
thus saved their lives from the fanatic fury of the populace.° 

These forced conversions in Gothia were the first fruits of the 
change of religion of the Wisigoths from Arianism to Catholic- 
ism. The Ostrogoths, Theodoric and Theodatus, had expressly 


1 Edict. Theoderici, cap. 143.—Cassiodori Variar. Iv, 33, 43; v,37. Cf. 111, 45. 

2 Concil. Agathens. ann. 506, cap. 40. This was embodied in the canon law 
(Gratian. Decr. Caus. xxvu, Q. i, cap. 14). The apologetic tone in which 
Sidonius Apollinaris, Bishop of Clermont, speaks of Jews whom he likes and who 
“solent hujusmodi homines honestas habere causas’’ shows that the more enlight- 
ened churchmen felt that any favor shown to the proscribed race exposed them 
to animadversion (Epistt. Lib. 111, Ep. 4; Lib. rv, Ep. 5). 

5 Concil. Quinisext. cap. 11 (Decr. Caus. xxvit, Q. i, cap. 13). 

4 Gregor. PP. I. Epistt. x11, 12 (Decreti Dist. xLv, cap. 3). 

5 Ejusd., Epistt. 1, 10, 35; 1, 32; v, 8; vu, 27; 1x, 6; xu, 12. It is true that 
Gregory strongly upheld the rule that Jews should hold no Christian slaves, but 
he permitted Christians to labor on their lands (Ibid. rv, 21). 

8 Ibid. 1, 47.—Venantii Fortunati Miscell. Lib. v, cap, 5. 


4O THE JEWS AND THE MOORS [Boox I 


declared that they could not interfere with the religion of their 
subjects, for no one can be forced unwillingly to believe.’ 
The Wisigoths, who dominated southern Gaul and Spain, when 
adapting the Roman law to suit their needs, had contented them- 
selves with punishing by confiscation the Christian who turned 
Jew, with liberating Christian slaves held by Jews, and with 
inflicting the death penalty on Jewish masters who should force 
Christian slaves to conversion, besides preserving the law of 
Theodosius II prohibiting Jews from holding office or building 
new synagogues.” This was by no means full toleration, but it 
was merciful in comparison with what followed the conversion 
of the Goths to Catholicism. The change commenced promptly, 
though it did not at once reach its full severity. The third 
council of Toledo, held in May, 589, to condemn the Arian heresy 
and to settle the details of the conversion, adopted canons which 
show how free had hitherto been the intercourse between the 
races. Jews were forbidden to have Christian wives or concu- 
bines or servants, and all children sprung from such unions were 
to be baptized; any Christian slave circumcised or polluted 
with Jewish rites was to be set free; no Jew was to hold an office 
in which he could inflict punishment on a Christian, and this 
action was followed by some further disabilities decreed by the 
council of Narbonne in December of the same year.’ That free- 
dom of discussion continued for some time is manifested by 
the audacity of a Jew named Froganis, not long afterwards, who, 
as we are told, in the presence of all the nobles of the court, 
exalted the synagogue and depreciated the Church; it was easier 
perhaps to close his mouth than to confute him, for Aurasius, 
Bishop of Toledo, excommunicated him and declared him 
anathematized by the Father, Son and Holy Ghost and by all 
the celestial hierarchy and cohorts.* 

The greatest churchman of the day, St. Isidor of Seville, whose 
career of forty years commenced with the Catholic revolution, 
did what in him lay to stimulate and justify persecution. His 


1 Cassiodor. Variar. 11, 27; x, 26. 

7 Lex Roman. Visigoth. Lib. xv1, Tit. iii, iv; Novell. Theodos. II, Tit. iii 
(Ed. Haenel, pp. 250, 256-8). 

$ Concil. Toletan. III, ann. 589, cap. xiv.—Concil. Narbonn. ann. 589, cap- 
pahib-«: 

* Gotth. Heine, Biblioth. Vet. Monumentt. Ecclesiasticor. p. 118 (Lipsie, 
1848). 


Cuap. IT] THE JEWS UNDER THE WISIGOTHS 41 


treatise against the Jews is not vituperative, as are so many 
later controversial writings, but he proves that they are con- 
demned for their fathers’ sins to dispersion and oppression until, 
at the end of the world, their eyes are to be opened and they 
are to believe.’ That he should have felt called upon to compose 
such a work was an evil sign, and still more evil were the con- 
clusions which he taught. They could not fail of deplorable 
results, as was seen when Sisebut ascended the throne in 612 
and signalized the commencement of his reign by a forcible 
conversion of all the Jews of the kingdom. What means he 
adopted we are not told, but of course they were violent, which 
St. Isidor mildly reproves, seeing that conversion ought to be 
sincere, but which yet he holds to be strictly within the com- 
petence of the Church.?. The Church in fact was thus brought 
face to face with the question whether the forcible propagation 
of the faith is lawful. This is so repugnant to the teachings of 
Christ that it could scarce be accepted, but, on the other hand, 
the sacrament of baptism is indelible, so the convenient doc- 
trine was adopted and became the settled policy that, while 
Christianity was not to be spread by force, unwilling converts 
were nevertheless Christians; they were not to be permitted to 
apostatize and were subject to all the pains and penalties of 
heresy for any secret inclination to their own religion.* This 


1 §. Isidori Hispalens. de Fide Cathol. contra Judzos Lib. 1, cap. 28; Lib. 11, 
cap. 5, 9. 

2S. Isidori Chron. n. 120; De Regibus Gothorum, n. 60; Sententt. Lib. 111, 
cap. 51, n. 4. 

In the perfected doctrine of the Church it was simply a question of policy and 
possibility whether the faith is to be extended by force or not, for the pope is 
supreme and has the authority to punish all, whether Jew or Gentile, who do 
not conform to the gospel.—Eymerici Direct. Inquisitor. p. 353 (Ed. Venet. 
1607). 

3 Concil. Toletan. IV, ann. 633, cap. 57—adopted into the canon law (Decr. 
cap. 5, Dist. xLV)—as well as a decretal of Gregory IV—“ Judi non sunt cogendi 
ad fidem, quam tamen si invite susceperint, cogendi sunt retinere” (Ibid. cap. 4). 
See also Ll. Wisigoth. Lib. xu, Tit. ii, 1.4 (Recared I), continued in Fuero 
Juzgo, XII, ii, 4. 

The Jew who had been baptized in infancy, or who accepted baptism as an 
alternative of death, and reverted to Judaism was to be prosecuted by the Inqui- 
sition as a heretic.—Nicholai, PP. IV. Bull. Turbato corde, 1288 (Bullar. Roman. 
I, 158, 179, 184, 263).—Cap. 13 in Sexto, Lib. v, Tit. iiiBernard, Guidon. Prac- 
tica, P. v, 3 v, n. 1.—Pegnz Comment. in Eymeric. Direct. Inquis., p. 349. For 


42 THE JEWS AND THE MOORS [Boox I 


fruitful conception led to infinite misery, as we shall see here- 
after, and was the impelling motive which created the Spanish 
Inquisition. 

Whatever may have been the extent and the success of Sise- 
but’s measures, the Jews soon afterwards reappear, and they 
and the conversos became the subject of an unintermittent 
series of ecclesiastical and secular legislation which shows that 
the policy so unfortunately adopted could only have attained 
its end by virtual extermination. The anvil bade fair to wear 
out the hammer—the constancy of the persecuted exhausted 
the ingenuity of the persecutor. With the conversion to Cathol- 
icism ecclesiastics became dominant throughout the Wisigothic 
territories and to their influence is attributable the varied series 
of measures which occupied the attention of the successive 
councils of Toledo from 633 until the Saracenic invasion in 711. 
Every expedient was tried—the seizure of all Jewish children, 
to be shut up in monasteries or to be given to God-fearing Chris- 
tians; the alternative of expulsion or conversion, to the enforce- 
ment of which all kings at their accession were to take a solemn 
oath; the gentle persuasives of shaving, scourging, confiscation 
and exile. That the people at large did not share in the intol- 
erance of their rulers is seen in the prohibitions of social inter- 
course, mixed marriages, and the holding of office. The spectre 
of proselytism was evoked in justification of these measures as 
though the persecuted Jew would seek to incur its dangers even 
had not the Talmud declared that ‘‘a proselyte is as damaging to 
Israel as an ulcer to a healthy body.” The enforced conver- 
sions thus obtained were regarded naturally with suspicion and 
the converts were the subjects of perpetual animadversion.* 


the established formula of interrogatory of Jews see MSS. Bibl. National de 
France, Collect. Doat., T. XX XVII, fol. 258. 

The treed conversion of Jews, so frequent throughout the Middle Ages, gave 
rise to many nice questions, exhaustively debated by the schoolmen. The sub- 
ject is fully treated in a Tractatus de Judeorum et Christianorum communione, etc., 
printed in Strassburg about 1470 (Hain, 9465), in which, for convenient use and 
reference, is gathered together all the ecclesiastical legislation against the unfor- 
tunate race, forming a deplorable exhibition of human perversity. 

1 Concil. Toletan. IV, ann. 633, cap. 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66; Conc. 
VI, ann. 638, cap. 3; Cone. VIII, ann. 653, cap. 12; Conc. IX, ann. 655, cap. 17; 
Conc. X, ann. 656, cap. 7; Conc. XII, ann. 681, cap. 9; Conc. XIII, ann. 683, 
cap. 9;-Conc. XVI, ann. 693, cap. 1. 

Ll. Wisigoth. Lib. xu,. Tit. ii, ll. 4-17; Tit. iii, I. 1, 2, 10, 12, 16, 17, 19, 24 
(Fuero Juzgo, ibidem.). 


Cuap. IT] THE JEWS UNDER THE WISIGOTHS 43. 


Thus the Church had triumphed and the toleration of the 
Arian Goths had been converted into persecuting orthodoxy. 
History repeats itself and, eight hundred years later, we shall 
see the same process with the same results. Toleration was. 
changed into persecution; conversions obtained by force, or by 
its equivalent, irresistible pressure, were recognized as fictitious, 
and the unfortunate converts were held guilty of the unpar- 
donable crime of apostasy. Although the Goths did not invent. 
the Inquisition, they came as near to it as the rudeness of the 
age and the looseness of their tottering political organization 
would permit, by endeavoring to create through the priesthood. 
a network of supervision which should attain the same results. 
The Inquisition was prefigured and anticipated. 

As apparently the Jews could not be exterminated or the 
Conversos be trained into willing Christians, the two classes. 
naturally added an element of discontent to the already unquiet 
and motley population consisting of superimposed layers of 
Goths, Romans and Celtiberians. The Jews doubtless aided. 
the Gallo-Roman rebellion of Flavius Paulus about 675, for 
St. Julian of Toledo, in describing its suppression by King 
Wamba, denounces Gaul in the bitterest terms, ending with 
the crowning reproach that it is a refuge for the blasphemy of 
the Jews, whom Wamba banished after his triumph.’ In spite 
of the unremitting efforts for their destruction, they still re- 
mained a source of danger to the State. At the council of Toledo 
in 694, King Egiza appealed to his prelates to devise some means. 
by which Judaism should be wiped out, or all Jews be subjected 
to the sword of justice and their property be appropriated, for 
all efforts to convert them had proved futile and there was danger 
that, in conjunction with their brethren in other lands, they 
would overthrow Christianity. Inits response the council alludes. 
to a conspiracy by which the Jews had endeavored to occupy 
the throne and bring about the ruin of the land, and it decrees 
that all Jews, with their wives, children and posterity, shall be 
reduced to perpetual servitude, while their property is declared 
confiscated to the king. They are to be transferred from their 
present abodes and be given to such persons as the king may 
designate, who shall hold them as slaves so long as they per- 
severe in their faith, taking from them their children as they 


1S. Juliani Toleti Vit. Wambe, n. 5, 28 (Florez, Espafia Sagrada, VI, 536, 556). 


44 THE JEWS AND THE MOORS [Boox I 


reach the age of seven and marrying them only to Christians. 
Such of their Christian slaves as the king may select shall receive 
a portion of the confiscated property and continue to pay the 
taxes hitherto levied on the Jews.’ 

Doubtless this inhuman measure led to indiscriminate plunder 
and infinite misery, but its object was not accomplished. The 
Jews remained, and when came the catastrophe of the Saracen 
conquest they were ready enough to welcome the Berber in- 
vaders. That they were still in Spain is attributed to Witiza, 
who reigned from 700 to 710 and who is said to have recalled 
them and favored them with privileges greater than those of 
the Church, but Witiza, though a favorite target for the abuse 
of later annalists, was an excellent prince and the best con- 
temporary authority says nothing of his favoring the Jews.’ 

If the Jews helped the Moslem, as we may readily believe, 
both from the probabilities of the case and the testimony of 
Spanish and Arab writers,* they did no more than a large por- 
tion of the Christians. To the mass of the population the Goths 
were merely barbarous masters, whose yoke they were ready 
to exchange for that of the Moors, nor were the Goths them- 
selves united. At the decisive battle of Xeres de la Frontera, 
Don Roderie’s right and left wings were commanded by Sise- 
bert and Oppas, the dethroned sons of Witiza, who fled without 
striking a blow, for the purpose of causing his defeat. The land 
was occupied by the Moors with little resistance, and on terms 
easy to the conquered. It is true that, where resistance was 
made, the higher classes were reduced to slavery, the lands 
were divided among the soldiery and one-fifth was reserved 
to the State, on which peasants were settled subject to an impost 
of one-third of the product, but submission was general under 
capitulations which secured to the inhabitants the possession 
of their property, subject to the impost of a third, and allowed 
them the enjoyment of their laws and religion under native 
counts and bishops. In spite of this liberality, vast numbers 


1 Concil. Toletan. XVII, ann. 694, cap. 8. 

? Roderic. Toletan. de Rebus Hispan. Lib. m1, cap. xvi.—Morales, Corénica 
General, T. VI, p. 361. Isidor of Beja, however, is the best authority for the 
period, and he speaks of Witiza in terms of high praise (Isidor. Pacens. Chron. n. 
29, 30). See also Dozy, Recherches sur l Histoire et la Littérature de l’ Espagne, I, 
16-17 (3e Ed. Leipzig, 1881). 

3 Rod. Toletan. op. cit. Lib. m1, cap. xxii, xxiii.—Dozy, I, 49, 52. 


Cuap. IT] THE MOZARABES 45 


embraced Mohammedanism, partly to avoid taxation and 
partly through conviction that the marvellous success of the 
Moslem cause was a proof of its righteousness.’ 

The hardy resolution of the few who preferred exile and 
independence, and who found refuge in the mountains of Galicia 
and Asturias preserved the Peninsula from total subjection to 
Islam. During the long struggle of the Reconquest, the social 
and religious condition of Spain was strangely anomalous, pre- 
senting a mixture of races and faiths whose relations, however 
antagonistic they might be in principle, were, for the most part, 
dominated by temporal interests exclusively. Mutual attrition, 
so far from inflaming prejudices, led to mutual toleration, so 
that fanaticism became reduced to a minimum precisely in that 
corner of Christendom where a priort reasoners have been 
tempted to regard it as especially violent. 

The Saracens long maintained the policy adopted in the con- 
quest and made no attempt to convert their Christian subjects, 
just as in the Levantine provinces the Christians, although 
oppressed, were allowed to retain their religion, and in Persia, 
after the fall of the Sassanids, Parsism continued to exist for 
centuries and only died out gradually.? In fact, the condition 
of the Mozadrabes, or subject Christians, under the caliphs of 
Cérdova was, for the most part, preferable to what it had been 
under the Gothic kings. Mozdérabes were frequently in com- 
mand of the Moslem armies; they formed the royal body-guard 
and were employed as secretaries in the highest offices of state. 
In time they so completely lost the Latin tongue that it became 


1 Dozy, I, 17, 44, 53, 54, 56, 72, 74-5, 79, 350-1. 

2 An interesting instance of Moslem toleration is seen in the Farfanes—Chris-~ 
tians of Morocco who claimed to be the descendants of Goths deported at the 
conquest at the request of Count Julian. In 1386 they sent Sancho Rodrfguez, 
one of their number, to Juan I to ask to be received back in Spain. Juan 
obtained from the King of Morocco permission for their departure, and promised 
to provide for them lands and support. In 1390 they came, numbering fifty 
cavaliers with their wives and children, and bringing a letter from the Moslem 
ruler speaking of them as nobles descended from the Goths and praising greatly 
their loyalty and valor. It was in riding out from Burgos to welcome them that 
Juan’s horse fell and caused his death. In 1394 Henry III gave them a confirma- 
tion of their ancient nobility, and in 1430 and 1433 we still find them recognized 
in Seville as a distinct class.—Ayala, Crén. de Juan I, afio X, cap. xx.—Zufiiga, 
Annales de Sevilla, Lib. vii, afio 1386, n. 2; afio 1390, n. 3; Lib. 1x, afio 1394, 
n. 1.—Archivo de Sevilla, Seccion primera, Carpeta clxxiv, n. 4, 8. 


46 THE JEWS AND THE MOORS [Book I 


necessary to translate the scripture and the canons into Arabic.’ 
The Church organization was maintained, with its hierarchy 
of prelates, who at times assembled in councils; there was suffi- 
cient intellectual activity for occasional heresies to spring up 
and be condemned, like those of Hostegesis and Migetio in the 
ninth century, while, half a century earlier, the bull of Adrian 
I, addressed to the orthodox bishops of Spain and denouncing 
the Adoptianism of Felix of Urgel, which was upheld by Elipan- 
dus, Archbishop of Toledo, shows the freedom of intercourse 
existing between the Mozdrabes and the rest of Christendom.’ 
We hear of 8. Eulogio of Cérdova, whose two brothers, Alvar 
and Isidor, had left Spain and taken service with the Emperor 
Louis le Germanique; he set out in 850 to join them, but was 
stopped at Pampeluna by war and returned by way of Saragossa, 
bringing with him a number of books, including Virgil, Horace, 
Juvenal, Porphyry, the epigrams of Aldhelm and the fables of 
Avienus.? Mixed marriages seem not to have been uncommon 
and there were frequent instances of conversion from either 
faith, but Mozdrabic zealots abused the Moslem tolerance by 
publicly decrying Islam and making proselytes, which was 
forbidden, and a sharp persecution arose under Abderrhaman II 
and Mahomet I, in which there were a number of victims, 
including San Eulogio, who was martyred in 859.* 

This persecution gave rise to an incident which illustrates 
the friendly intercourse between Christian and Saracen. In 
858, Hilduin, Abbot of S. Germain-des-Prés, under the auspices 


1 Francisco Ferndndez y Gonzalez, Estado de los Mudéjares de Castilla, pp. 
14-18 (Madrid, 1866).—S. Eulogii Memorialis Sanctorum Lib. 11, cap. xvi; Lib. 
III, cap. i (Migne’s Patrologia, CX V, 787, 800). 

? Florez, Espafia Sagrada, XI, 309 sqq.; V, Append. x.—Samsonis Abbatis 
Cordubensis Apolog. Lib. 11 (Ib. XI, 388 sgqg.).—Alvari Cordubens. Epist. vii, 
viii (Ibid. XI, 147 sqq.).—Hostegesis was Bishop of Malaga, and the free exercise 
of discipline in the Mozdérabic church is shown in the complaint of the cruelty 
with which he exacted the tercia or tribute due to him, causing delinquents to be 
paraded through the streets with soldiers scourging them and proclaiming that all 
defaulters should be similarly treated.—Florez, XII, 326. 

3S. Eulogii Epist. iii (Migne, CX V, 845-9).—Alvari Cordubens. Vit. S. Eulogii 
(Ibid. 712).—The description by Alvar of his education with S. Eulogio shows. 
that the Christian schools of Cordova were flourishing and active (Ibid. cap. i, 
p. 708). 

4 Alvari Cordubens. Vit. 8. Eulogii, cap. iv, v. 


se ee 


Eulogii Memorialis Sanctorum 


Marize.—Ejusd. Lib. Apologet. Martyrum. 


Cuap. IT] THE MOZARABES 47 


of Charles le Chauve, sent two monks to Spain to procure the 
relics of St. Vincent. On reaching Languedoc they learned 
that his body had been carried to Benevento, but they also 
heard of the persecution at Cordova and were delighted, know- 
ing that there must be plenty of relics to be obtained. They 
therefore kept on to Barcelona, where Sunifred, the next in 
command to the count, commended them to Abdulivar, Prince 
of Saragossa, with whom he had intimate relations. From 
Saragossa they reached Cérdova, where the Mozdrabic Bishop 
Saul received them kindly and assisted them in obtaining the 
bodies of St. George and St. Aurelius, except that, as the head 
of the latter was lacking, that of St. Natalia was substituted. 
With these precious spoils they returned in safety to Paris, by 
way of Toledo, Alcala, Saragossa and Barcelona, to the immense 
gratification, we are told, of King Charles." The persecution was 
but temporary and, a century later, in 956, we hear of Abder- 
rhaman III sending Recemund, Bishop of Elvira (Granada), as 
his ambassador to Otho the Great at Frankfort, where he per- 
suaded Liutprand of Cremona to write one of his historical 
works.” When the Cid conquered Valencia, in 1096, one of 
the conditions of surrender was that the garrison should be 
composed of Mozdrabes, and the capitulation was signed by 
the principal Christian as well as Moslem citizens.’ 

The number of the Mozdrabes of course diminished rapidly 
in the progress of reconquest as the Christian territories ex- 
panded from Galicia to Leon and Castile. Early in the twelfth 
century Alfonso VI, in reducing to order his extensive acquisi- 
tions, experienced much trouble with them; they are described 
as being worse than Moors, and he settled the matter by the 
decisive expedient of deporting multitudes of them to Africa.‘ 
The rapid progress of his arms, however, had so alarmed the 
petty kings among whom Andalusia was divided that they had, 
about 1090, invited to their assistance the Berbers known as 
Almoravides, who drove back Alfonso on the bloody field of 
Zalaca. Their leader, Jusuf ibn Techufin, was not content to 
fight for the benefit of his allies; he speedily overthrew their 


1 Aimoini Translatio SS. Georgii, Aurelii et Nathalie, Lib.1; Lib. m1, cap. 
XXViil. 

? Liutprandi Antopodosis, Lib. 11, cap. i. 

3 Dozy, Recherches, II, 178. 

* Ferndndez y Gonzdlez, p. 57. 


48 THE JEWS AND THE MOORS [Boox I 


feeble dynasties and established himself as supreme in Moslem 
Spain. The Almoravides were savage and fanatical; they could 
not endure the sight of Christians enjoying freedom of worship, 
and bitter persecution speedily followed, until, in 1125, the 
Mozdrabes invited the aid of Alfonso el Batallador. They sent 
a roll of their best warriors, comprising twelve thousand names, 
and promised that these and many more would join him. He 
came and spent fifteen months on Moorish territory, but made 
no permanent conquests, and on his departure the wretched 
Christians begged him to let them accompany him to escape 
the wrath of the Almoravides. Ten thousand of them did so, 
while of those who remained large numbers were deported to 
Africa, where they mostly perished.1. The miserable remnant 
had a breathing spell, for the atmosphere of Spain seemed un- 
propitious to fanaticism and the ferocity of the Berbers speedily 
softened. We soon find them fraternizing with Christians. King 
Ali of Cérdova treated the latter well and even entrusted to a 
captive noble of Barcelona named Reverter the command of 
his armies. His son Techufin followed his example and was 
regarded as the especial friend of the Christians, who aided him 
in his African wars.2 Yet this interval of rest was short. In 
1146, another Berber horde, known as Almohades, overthrew 
the Almoravides and brought a fresh accession of savage ferocity 
from the African deserts. Their caliph, Abd-al-mumin, pro- 
claimed that he would suffer none but true believers in his 
dominions; the alternatives offered were death, conversion or 
expatriation. Many underwent pretended conversion, others 
went into voluntary exile, and others were deported to Africa, 
after which the Mozdrabes disappear from view.* 

Yet it was as impossible for the Almohades to retain their 
fanaticism as it had proved for their predecessors. When, in 
1228, on the deposition of the Almohad Miramamolin Al-Abdel, 
his nephew Yahia was raised to the throne, his brother Al- 
Memon-Abo-l-Ola, who was in Spain, claimed the succession. 
To obtain the assistance of San Fernando III, who lent him 


1 Dozy, Recherches, I, 265, 269, 349, 352-61.—Orderici Vital. Hist. Eccles. 
P. m1, Lib. xiii, cap. 2. 

? Cronica de Alfonso VII, cap. 46, 101 (Espafia Sagrada, X XI, 360, 398). 

* Dozy, Recherches, I, 370-1.—Ferndndez y Gonzdlez, p. 19.—See also an 
essay on the Mozdrabes of Valencia by Don Roque Chabas, in the Boletin de la 
Real Academia de la Historia, XVIII, 19. 


Cuap. IT] THE MULADIES 49 


twelve thousand Christian troops, he agreed to surrender ten 
frontier strongholds, to permit the erection of a Christian 
church in Morocco, where the Christians should celebrate pub- 
licly with ringing of bells, and to allow freedom of conversion 
from Islam to Christianity, with prohibition of the converse. 
This led to the foundation of an episcopate of Morocco, of which 
the first bishop was Fray Aguelo, succeeded by Fray Lope, 
both Franciscans.’ Co-operation of this kind with the Christians 
meets us at every step in the annals of the Spanish Saracens. 
Aben-al-Ahmar, who founded the last dynasty of Granada, 
agreed to become a vassal of San Fernando III, to pay him a 
tribute of 150,000 doblas per annum, to furnish a certain num- 
ber of troops whenever called upon, and to appear in the Cértes 
when summoned, like any other ricohome. He aided Fernando 
greatly in the capture of Seville, and, in the solemnities which 
followed the entry into the city, Fernando bestowed knighthood 
on him and granted him the bearing of the Castilian guidon— 
gules, a band or, with two serpents, and two crowned lions as 
supporters—a cognizance still to be seen in the Alhambra.’ 


The Muladtes, or Christian converts to Islam, formed another 
important portion of the Moorish community. At the con- 
quest, as we have seen, large numbers of Christians aposta- 
tized, slaves to obtain freedom and freemen to escape taxation. 
They were looked upon, however, with suspicion by Arabs and 
Berbers and were subjected to disabilities which led to frequent 
rebellions and murderous reprisals. On the suppression of a rising 
in Cordova, in 814, fifteen thousand of them emigrated to Egypt, 
where they captured Alexandria and held it until 826, when they 
were forced to capitulate and transferred their arms to Candia, 
founding a dynasty which lasted for a century and a half. Eight 
thousand of them established themselves in Fez, where they held 
their own and even in the fourteenth century were distinguish- 
able from the other Moslems. In Toledo, after several unsuc- 
cessful rebellions, the Muladies became dominant in 853 and 
remained independent for eighty years. Together with the Moza- 


1 Fernandez y Gonzalez, pp. 86-7, 93. The term Miramamolin, so often used 
by Christian writers as a personal name, is Amir-el-Momenin, or Prince of the 
Faithful, a title frequently assumed by Moorish rulers. 

2 Fernandez y Gonzalez, pp. 92, 96. 

4 


50 THE JEWS AND THE MOORS [Boox I 


rabes they almost succeeded in founding a kingdom of their own 
in the mountains of Ronda, under Omar ben Hafsun, who em- 
braced Christianity. Indeed, the facility of conversion from 
one faith to another was a marked feature of the period and 
shows how little firmness of religious conviction existed. The 
renegade, Ibn Meruan, who founded an independent state in 
Merida, taught a mixed faith compounded of both the great 
religions. Everywhere the Muladies were striving for freedom 
and establishing petty principalities—in Algarbe, in Priego, in 
Murcia, and especially in Aragon, where the Gothic family of 
the Beni-Cassi became supreme. After the reduction of Toledo 
by starvation, in 930, they become less prominent and gradu- 
ally merge into the Moslem population.’ This was assisted by 
the fact that they made common cause with their conquerors 
against the fanatic Almoravides and Almohades. The leader 
of the Andalusians against the latter was a man of Christian 
descent, Ibn-Mardanich, King of Valencia and Murcia. He 
wore Christian dress and arms, his language was Castilian and 
his troops were mostly Castilians, Navarrese and Catalans. To 
the Christians he was commonly known as the king Don Lope. 
Religious differences, in fact, were of much less importance 
than political aims, and everywhere, as we shall see, Christian 
and Moslem were intermingled in the interminable civil broils 
of that tumultuous time. In an attempt on Granada, in 1162, 
the principal captains of Ibn-Mardanich were two sons of the 
Count of Urgel and a grandson of Alvar Fafiez, the favorite 
lieutenant of the Cid? 


In these alternations of religious indifference and fanaticism, 
the position of the Jews under Moslem domination was neces- 
sarily exposed to severe vicissitudes. Their skill as physicians 
and their unrivalled talent in administration rendered them 
a necessity to the conquerors, whose favor they had gained by 
the assistance rendered in the invasion, but ever and anon there 
would come a burst of intolerance which swept them into obscu- 
rity if not into massacre. When Mahomet I ascended the throne 
of Cérdova, about 850, we are told that one of his first acts 
was the dismissal of all Jewish officials, including presumably 


1 Menéndez y Pelayo, Heterodoxos Espafioles, I, 640-5. 
* Dozy, Recherches, I, 365-7, 372-9. 


Cuap. IT] THE JEWS UNDER THE SARACENS 51 


R. Hasdai ben Ishak, who had been physician and vizier to his 
father, Abderrhaman II. A century later their wealth was so 
ereat that when the Jew Peliag went to the country palace of 
Alhakem, the Caliph of Cérdova, it is related that he was accom- 
panied by a retinue of seven hundred retainers of his race, all 
richly clad and riding in carriages.?, How insecure was their 
prosperity was proved, in 1066, when Samuel ha Levi and his 
son Joseph had been viziers and virtual rulers of Granada for 
fifty years. The latter chanced to exile Abu Ishac of Elvira, a 
noted theologian and poet, who took revenge in a bitter satire 
which had immense popular success. ‘‘The Jews reign in Gran- 
ada; they have divided between them the city and the provinces, 
and everywhere one of this accursed race is in supreme power. 
They collect the taxes, they dress magnificently and fare sump- 
tuously, while the true believers are in rags and wretchedness. 
The chief of these asses is a fatted ram. Slay him and his kin- 
dred and allies and seize their immense treasures. They have 
broken the compact between us and are subject to punishment 
as perjurers.”’? We shall see hereafter how ready was the Chris- 
tian mob to respond to such appeals; the Moslem was no better; 
a rising took place in which Joseph was assassinated in the royal 
palace, while four thousand Jews were massacred and _ their 
property pillaged. Again they recuperated themselves, but 
they suffered with the Christians under the fierce fanaticism 
of the Almohades. Indeed, they were exposed to a fiercer out- 
burst of wrath, for the robbery of the jewels of the Kaaba, 
which occurred about 1160, was attributed to Spanish Jews, 
and Abd-el-mumin was unsparing in enforcing his orders of 
conversion. Numbers were put to death and forty-eight syna- 
gogues were burnt. The Sephardim, or Spanish Jews, lost their 
most conspicuous doctor when, in this persecution, Maimonides 
fled to Egypt.‘ Still they continued to exist and to prosper. 
though exposed to destruction at any moment through the 
whims of the monarch or the passions of the people. Thus, in 
1375, in Granada, two men obstructed a street in a violent 
altercation and were vainly adjured to cease in the name of 


1 §. Eulogii Memorialis Sanctorum Lib. 1m, cap. iv.—Lindo’s History of the 
Jews of Spain, p. 44 (London, 1848). 

2 Lindo, p. 46. 

3 Dozy, Recherches, I, 285-9. 

* Lindo, p. 62. 


592 THE JEWS AND THE MOORS [Boox I 


Mahomet, when Isaac Amoni, the royal physician, who chanced 
to pass in his carriage, repeated the order and was obeyed. 
That a Jew should possess more influence than the name of 
the Prophet was unendurable; the people rose and a massacre 
ensued." 


While Saracen Spain was thus a confused medley of races and 
faiths, subject to no guiding principle and swayed by the policy 
or the prejudices of the moment, the Christian kingdoms were 
much the same, except that, during the early Middle Ages, out- 
bursts of fanaticism were lacking. Brave warriors learned to 
respect each other, and, as usual, it was the non-combatants, 
Christian priests and Moslem faquis, who retained their viru- 
lence. In the fierce struggles of the Reconquest there is little 
trace of race or religious hatred. The early ballads show the 
Moors regarded as gallant antagonists, against whom there was 
no greater animosity than was aroused in the civil strife which 
filled the intervals of Moorish warfare.? When, in 1149, Ramon 
Berenger IV of Barcelona, after a laborious siege, captured the 
long-coveted town of Lérida, the terms of surrender assumed 
the form of a peaceful agreement by which the Moorish Alcaide 
Avifelet became the vassal of Ramon Berenger and they mutually 
pledged each other fidelity. Avifelet gave up all his castles, re- 
tained certain rights in the territory and Ramon Berenger prom- 
ised him fiefs in Barcelona and Gerona.* More than this, the 
ceaseless civil wars on both sides of the boundary caused each to 
have constant recourse to those of hostile faith for aid or shelter, 
and the relations which grew up, although transitory and shifting, 


1 Lindo, pp. 156-7. 

? In the ballads the Moors are almost always represented as chivalric enemies. 
Even when celebrating their defeats, down to the capture of Granada, there is no 
contempt manifested and nowhere is to be seen a trace of religious acerbity. 
Many ballads have Moors as their heroes, as in those which celebrate the deeds 
of Bravonel and Reduan, and there is nothing to distinguish their treatment from 
that of Christians. Bravonel and Bernardo del Carpio are represented as com- 
panions in arms. When Bernardo is banished by his king he betakes himself 
forthwith to Granada to participate in a tournament, where 

Que hay unas Reales fiestas, Al que mejor lo ficiere 
Donde el premio serd dado Sea Moro 6 sea Cristiano; 
and there he is warmly welcomed by Muza, the most gallant knight of the Sara- 
cens.—Romances Antiguos Espafioles, I, 65 (Leipzig, 1844). 
3 Villanueva, Viage Literario, XVI, 159. 


Cuap. IT] SPANIARDS AND MOORS 53 


became so intricate that little difference between Christian and 
Moor could often be recognized by statesmen. Thus mutual tol- 
eration could not fail to establish itself, to the scandal of crusaders, 
who came to help the one side, and of the hordes of fresh fanatics 
who poured over from Africa to assist the other. 

This constant intermingling of Spaniard and Moor meets us at 
every step in Spanish history. Perhaps it would be too much to 
say, with Dozy, that ‘‘a Spanish knight of the Middle Ages 
fought neither for his country nor for his religion; he fought, like 
the Cid, to get something to eat, whether under a Christian or a 
Mussulman prince” and “‘ the Cid himself was rather a Mussulman 
than a Catholic,’* though Philip II endeavored to have him 
canonized—but there can be no question that religious zeal had 
little to do with the Reconquest. In the adventurous career of the 
Cid, Christians and Moslems are seen mingled in both contending 
armies, and it is for the most part impossible to detect in the 
struggle any interest either of race or religion.? This had long 
been customary. Towards the end of the ninth century, Bermudo, 
brother of Alfonso III, for seven years held Astorga with the aid 
of the Moors, to whom he fled for refuge when finally dislodged. 
About 940 we find a King Aboiahia, a vassal of Abderrhaman of 
Cordova, transferring allegiance to Ramiro II and then returning 
to his former lord, and some fifteen years later, when Sancho I 
was ejected by a conspiracy, he took refuge with Abderrhaman, 
by whose aid he regained his kingdom, the usurper Ordofio, in 
turn flying to Cérdova, where he was hospitably received.* 
About 990 Bermudo II gave his sister to wife to the Moorish 
King of Toledo, resulting in an unexpected miracle. In the ter- 
rible invasion of Almanzor, in 997, which threatened destruction 
to the Christians, we are told that he was accompanied by 
numerous exiled Christian nobles. Alfonso VI of Castile, when 
overcome by his brother, Sancho II, sought asylum, until the 
death of the latter, in Toledo—a hospitality which he subse- 
quently repaid by conquering the city and kingdom.* His court 
was semi-oriental; during his exile he had become familiar with 


1 Dozy, Recherches, II, 203, 233. 

2 Dozy, II, 109, 111.—Edélestand du Meril, Poésies populaires Latines, pp. 
312-13. 

’ Chron. Sampiri Asturicens, n. 3, 22, 26 (HEspafia Sagrada, XIV, 439, 452, 
455). 

* Chron. Pelagii Ovietens. (Espafia Sagrada, XIV, 468, 472). 


54 THE JEWS AND THE MOORS [Book I 


Arabic; in his prosperity he gathered around him Saracen poets 
and sages, and among his numerous successive wives was Zaida, 
daughter of Al-Mutamid, King of Seville. His contemporary, 
Sancho I of Aragon, was equally given to Moslem culture and 
habitually signed his name with Arabic characters.’ 

The co-operation of Christian and Moor continued to the last. 
In 1270, when Alfonso X had rendered himself unpopular by 
releasing Portugal from vassalage to Leon, his brother, the 
Infante Felipe and a number of the more powerful ricosomes con- 
spired against him. Their first thought was to obtain an alliance 
with Abu Jusuf, King of Morocco, who gladly promised them 
assistance. The prelates of Castile fanned the flame, hoping in 
the confusion to gain enlarged privileges. Felipe and his con- 
federates renounced allegiance to Alfonso, in accordance with the 
fuero, and betook themselves to Granada, committing frightful 
devastations by the way. Everything promised a disastrous 
war with the Moors of both sides of the straits, when, through the 
intervention of Queen Violante, concessions were made to the 
rebellious nobles and peace was restored.?, So when, in 1282, 
Sancho IV revolted against his father and was supported by all 
the cities except Seville and by all the ricosomes save the Master 
of Calatrava, and was recognized by the Kings of Granada, Por- 
tugal, Aragon and Navarre, Alfonso X in his destitution sent his 
crown to Abu Jusuf and asked for a loan on it as a pledge. The 
chivalrous Moslem at once sent him 60,000 doblas and followed 
this by coming with a large force of horse and foot, whereupon 
Sancho entered into alliance with Granada and a war ensued with 
Christians and Moors on both sides, till the death of Alfonso 
settled the question of the succession.’ In 1324, Don Juan 
Manuel was Adelantado de la Frontera; conceiving some cause 
of quarrel with his cousin, Alfonso XI, he at once entered into an 
alliance with Granada, then at war with Castile, and in 1333 his 
turbulence rendered Alfonso unable to prevent the capture of 
Gibraltar or to recover it when he made the attempt.* Pedro the 
Cruel, in 1366 and again in 1368, had Moorish troops to aid him 
in his struggles with Henry of Trastamara. In the latter year 


1 Fernandez y Gonzalez, pp. 34, 48, 114. 

2 Crénica de Don Alfonso X, cap. xix-lviii. 

§ Ibidem cap. lxxvi.—Barrantes, Ilustraciones, Lib. I, cap. vi, xi (Memorial 
hist. espafiol, IX, 72-9, 92-8). 

* Crénica de Don Alfonso XI, cap. lvii, exi, exxv. 


Cuap. IT] ALLIANCES WITH MOORS’. 55 


the King of Granada came to his aid with a force of 87,000 men, 
and, in the final battle at Montiel, Pedro had 1500 Moorish horse- 
men in his army.’ One of the complaints formulated against 
Henry IV, in 1464, was that he was accompanied by a force of 
Moors who committed outrages upon Christians.’ 

It was the same in Aragon. No knight of the cross earned a 
more brilliant reputation for exploits against the infidel than 
Jaime I, who acquired by them his title of el Conquistador, yet 
when, in 1260, he gave his nobles permission to serve in a crusade 
under Alfonso X, he excepted the King of Tunis, and on Alfonso’s 
remonstrating with him he explained that this was because of 
the love which the King of Tunis bore him and of the truce exist- 
ing between them and of the number of his subjects who were in 
Tunis with much property, all of whom would be imperilled.* 
On the accession of Jaime II, in 1291, envoys came to him from 
the Kings of Granada and Tremecen to renew the treaties had 
with Alfonso III. To the latter Jaime replied, promising freedom 
of trade, demanding the annual tribute of 2000 doblas which had 
been customary and asking for the next summer a hundred light 
horse paid for three months, to aid him against his Christian 
enemies.* As late as 1405, the treaty between Martin of Aragon 
and his son Martin of Sicily on the one hand and Mahomet, King 
of Granada, on the other, not only guarantees free intercourse and 
safety to the subjects of each and open trade in all ports and 
towns of their respective dominions, but each party agrees, when 
called upon, to assist the other, except against allies—Aragon and 
Sicily with four or five galleys well armed and manned and 
Granada with four or five hundred cavalry. 

All these alliances and treaties for freedom of trade and inter- 
course were in direct antagonism to the decrees of the Church, 
which in its councils ordered priests every Sunday to denounce 
as excommunicate, or even liable to be reduced to slavery, all who 
should sell to Moors iron, weapons, timber, fittings for ships, 
bread, wine, animals to eat, ride or till the ground, or who should 
serve in their ships as pilots or in their armies in war upon Chris- 


1 Ayala, Crénica de Don Pedro I, afio xvii, cap. iv; afio xrx, cap. iv, v; afio 
may cap V1. 

? Barrantes, Ilustraciones, Lib. vir, cap. xxii. 

% Memorial histérico espafiol, I, 159. 

* Tbidem III, 151. 

5 Coleccion de Documentos inéditos de la Corona de Aragon, I, 25. 


56 THE JEWS AND THE MOORS ~- [Boox I 


tians... It was in vain that Gregory XI, in 1372, ordered all 
fautors and receivers of Saracens to be prosecuted as heretics by 
the Inquisition, and equally vain was the deduction drawn by 
Eymerich from this, that any one who lent aid or counsel or favor 
to the Moors was a fautor of heresy, to be punished as such by 
the Holy Office. In spite of the thunders of the Church the 
traders continued trading and the princes made offensive and 
defensive alliances with the infidel. 

Nor, with the illustrious example of the Cid before them, had 
Christian nobles the slightest hesitation to aid the Moors by 
taking service with them. When, in 1279, Alonso Pérez de 
Guzman, the founder of the great house of Medina Sidonia, was 
insulted in the court of Alfonso, he promptly renounced his 
allegiance, converted all his property into money, and raised a 
troop with which he entered the service of Abu Jusuf of Morocco. 
There he remained for eleven years, except a visit to Seville to 
marry Dofia Maria Coronel, whom he carried back to Morocco. 
He was made captain of all the Christian troops in Abu Jusuf’s 
employ and aided largely in the war which transferred the sov- 
ereignty of that portion of Africa from the Almohades to the 
Beni Marin. He accumulated immense wealth, which by a 
stratagem he transferred to Spain, where it purchased the estates 
on which the greatness of the house was based. The family 
historiographer, writing in 1541, feels obliged to explain this 


‘ Concil. Lateran. IV, ann. 1216 ad calcem (Harduin. VII, 75).—Cap. 6, 17, 
Extra, Lib. v, Tit. vii—Concil. Lugdunens. I, ann. 1245, cap. xvii (Harduin. VIII, 
394).—Concil. Tlerdens. ann. 1246 (Aguirre, VI, 318).—Concil. Vallisolet. ann. 
1322, cap. xxii (Aguirre, V, 251).—Cap. 1 Extrav. Commun. Lib. v, Tit. ii.— 
Urbani PP. V, Bull. Apostolatus, 1364 (Bullar. Roman. Ed. Luxemburg. I, 
261).—Nicholai PP. V, Bull. Olam, 1450 (Ibid. I, 361), and finally in the standard 
anathema of the bull in Cena Domini. 

Considering the character of the Roman curia in the Middle Ages it would 
scarce be malicious to suggest that the chief object of these prohibitions was to 
create a market for licenses to violate them, and St. Antonino of Florence, about 
the middle of the fifteenth century, tells us that as a rule the Venetian merchants 
had them (S. Antonini Confessionale). 

In spite of his laxity in practice, Alfonso X in the Partidas embodies the 
Lateran decree denouncing slavery for all who aid the Saracens in any manner 
(Partidas, P. rv, Tit. xxi, ley 4) and in 1253 he admitted papal control in such 
matters by obtaining in advance from Innocent IV ratification of certain treaties 
which he was negotiating with the princes of Africa (Ferndndez y Gonzdlez, 
p. 337). 

? Bullar. Roman. I, 263.—Eymerici Direct. Inquisit. p. 351 (Ed. Venet. 1607). 


Cuar. II] THE MUDEJARES 57 


readiness to serve the infidel, so abhorrent to the convictions of 
the sixteenth century. He tells us that at that period the Moors, 

both of Granada and Africa, were unwarlike and were accustomed — 
to rely upon Christian troops, and that princes, nobles and knights 
were constantly in their service. Henry, brother of Alfonso X, 
served the King of Tunis four years and amassed large wealth; 
Garcf Martinez de Gallegos was already in the service of Abu 
Jusuf when Guzman went there; Gonzalo de Aguilar became a 
vassal of the King of Granada and fought for him. In 1352, 
when Pedro the Cruel began to reduce his turbulent nobles to 
order, Don Juan de la Cerda, a prince of the blood, went to 
Morocco for assistance and, failing to obtain it, remained there 
and won great renown by his knightly deeds till he was reconciled 
to Pedro and returned to Castile. Examples might be multiphed, 
but these will suffice to indicate how few scruples of religion 
existed among the Spaniards of the Middle Ages. As Barrantes 
says, adventurous spirits in those days took service with the 
Moors as in his time they sought their fortunes in the Indies. 


It is thus easy to understand how, in the progress of the Recon- 
quest, the Moors of the territory acquired were treated with even 
ereater forbearance than the Christians had been when Spain was 
first overrun. When raids were made or cities were captured by 
force, there was no hesitation in putting the inhabitants to the 
sword or in carrying them off into slavery,? but when capitula- 
tions were made or provinces submitted, the people were allowed 
to remain, retaining their religion and property, and becoming 
known under name of Mudéjares. 

The enslaved Moor was his master’s property, like his cattle, but 
entitled to some safeguards of life and limb. Even baptism did 
not manumit him unless the owner were a Moor or a Jew.® That 


1 Barrantes, Ilustraciones, etc., Lib. 1, cap. iv, xiii, Xiv, xx, xxi.—Ayala, Crénica 
de Don Pedro I, afio III, cap. iii. 

? Chron. Sampiri Asturicens. n. 16, 24, 25 (Espafia Sagrada, XIV, 447, 454, 
455).—Marca Hispanica, p. 1232. 

3 Partidas, P. 1v, Tit. xxi, leyes 6, 8; Tit. xxii, ley 3. In the Fuero Real 
de Espafia the only allusion to Moors is as slaves (Lib. tv, Tit. xi, ley 3; Tit. 
xiv, ley 1). It is virtually the same in the old Fuero of Madrid (Memorias de 
la R. Acad. de la Historia, VIII, 40). 

The Church held that baptism manumitted the slave, even when the master 
was Christian, but when it sought to enforce the rule the masters resisted, either 
forbidding the baptism or demanding from the clergy the value of the slave and 


58 THE JEWS AND THE MOORS [Boox I 


he was frequently a man of trained skill and education is seen 
in the provision that, if his master confided to him a shop or a 
ship, the former was bound to fulfill all contracts entered into by 
his slave. Thus the free Castilian, whose business was war, had 
his trade and commerce to a considerable extent, as well as his 
agriculture, carried on by slaves, and the rest was mostly in the 
hands of the Jews and the free Moors or Mudéjares. Labor thus 
became the badge of races regarded as inferior; 1t was beneath the 
dignity of the freeman, and when, as we shall see hereafter, the 
industrious population was expelled by bigotry, the prosperity of 
Spain collapsed. 

As for the Mudéjares, the practice of allowing them to remain 
in the reconquered territories began early. Even in Galicia they 
were to be found, and in Leon documents of the tenth century 
contain many Moorish names among those who confirm or wit- 
ness them.” The Fuero of Leon, granted by Alfonso V in 1020, 
alludes to Moors holding slaves, and the Berber population there 
is still represented by the Maragatos, to the south-west of Astorga 
—a race perfectly distinct from the Spaniards, retaining much 
of their African costume and speaking Castilian imperfectly, 
although it is their only language.* Fernando I (1033-65), who 
rendered the Kings of Toledo and Seville tributary, and who was 
besieging Valencia when he died, alternated in his policy towards 
the inhabitants of his extensive conquests. In the early part of 
his reign he allowed them to remain; then he adopted depopula- 
tion, and finally he returned to his earlier methods.* Alfonso VI 
followed the more liberal system; when he occupied Toledo, in 
1085, he granted a capitulation to the inhabitants which secured 
to them their property and religion, with self-government and 
the possession of their great mosque.* When, during his absence, 
the Frenchman, Bernard Abbot of Sahagun, newly elected to the 
archbishopric, in concert with his queen, Constance of Burgundy, 


seizing pledges to ensure payment. Innocent IEI was much scandalized by this. 
In 1205 he complained to Alfonso IX that in place of requiring such converted 
slaves to be paid for at the price fixed by the canons he allowed the owner to 
determine the value, and thus the Bishop of Burgos had recently been forced to 
pay two hundred gold pieces for a girl not worth ten deniers (Innoc, PP. III, 
Regest. vir, 50; rx, 150). 

1 Partidas, P. 1v, Tit. xxi, ley 7. 7? Ferndndez y Gonzalez, pp. 21, 24-5. 

* Dozy, Recherches, I, 124-6. * Ferndndez y Gonzdlez, p. 28. 

® Ayala, Crénica de Don Pedro I, afio 1, cap. xvii. 


Cuap. IT] THE MUDEJARES 59 


suddenly entered the mosque, consecrated it and placed a bell 
on its highest minaret, Alfonso was greatly angered. He has- 
tened to Toledo, threatening to burn both the queen and the 
archbishop, and only pardoned them at the intercession of the 
Moors, who dreaded possible reprisals after his death. His policy, 
in fact, was to render his rule more attractive to the Moslem 
population than that of his tributaries, the petty reyes de taijas, 
who were obliged to oppress their subjects in order to satisfy his 
exigencies. He even styled himself Emperador de los dos cultos. 
His tolerant wisdom justified itself, for, after the coming of the 
_ Almoravides, in spite of the disastrous defeats of Zalaca and Uclés, 
he was able to hold his own and even to extend his boundaries, 
for the native Moors preferred his domination to that of the 
savage Berbers.’ 

His successors followed his example, but it was not regarded 
with favor by the Church. During the centuries of mental torpor 
which preceded the dawn of modern civilization there was little 
fanaticism. With the opening of the twelfth century various 
causes awoke the dormant spirit. Crusading enthusiasm brought 
increased religious ardor and the labors of the schoolmén com- 
menced the reconstruction of theology which was to render the 
Church dominant over both worlds. The intellectual and spiritual 
movement brought forth heresies which, by the commencement 
of the thirteenth century, aroused the Church to the necessity of 
summoning all its resources to preserve its supremacy. All this 
made itself felt, not only in Albigensian crusades and the estab- 
lishment of the Inquisition, but in increased intolerance to Jew 
and Saracen, in a more fiery antagonism to all who were not 
included in the pale of Christianity. How this worked was seen, 
in 1212, when, after the brilliant victory of Las Navas de Tolosa, 
Alfonso IX advanced to Ubeda, where 70,000 men had collected, 
and they offered to become Mudéjares and to pay him a million 
of doblas. The terms were acceptable and he agreed to them, 
but the clerical chiefs of the crusade, the two archbishops, Rod- 
rigo of Toledo and Arnaud of Narbonne, objected and forced him 
to withdraw his assent. He offered the besieged to let them 
depart on the payment of the sum, but they were unable to col- 
lect so large an amount on the spot, and they were put to the 


1 Fernandez y Gonzilez, pp. 39, 45-6, 58. 


60 THE JEWS AND THE MOORS [Book I 


sword, except those reserved as slaves... In the same spirit 
Innocent IV, in 1248, ordered Jaime I of Aragon to allow no 
Saracens to reside in his recently conquered Balearic Isles except 
as slaves.’ 

In spite of the opposition of the Church the policy of the 
mudéjalato was continued until the work of the Reconquest 
seemed on the point of completion under San Fernando III. The 
King of Granada was his vassal, like any other Castilian noble. 
He subdued the rest of the land, giving the local chiefs advan- 
tageous terms and allowing them to assume the title of kings. 
The Spanish Moors were thus reduced to submission and he was 
preparing to carry his arms into Africa at the time of his death, 
in 1252.23 That Moorish rule, more or less independent, continued 
in the Peninsula for yet two centuries and a half, is attributable 
solely to the inveterate turbulence of the Castilian magnates 
aided by the disorderly ambition of members of the royal family. 
During this interval successive fragments were added to Christian 
territory, when internal convulsions allowed opportunities of con- 
quest, and in these the system which had proved so advantageous 
was followed. Moor and Jew were citizens of the realm, regarded 
as a desirable class of the population, and entitled to the public 
peace and security for their property under the same sanctions 
as the Catholic.*’ They are enumerated with Christians in charters 
granting special exemptions and privileges to cities, safeguards 
for fairs and for general trade.” Numerous Fueros which have 
reached us place all races on the same level, and a charter of 
Alfonso X, in 1272, to the city of Murcia, in its regulations as to 


1 Mondexar, Memorias de Alonso VIII, cap. ev, eviii.—Roderici Toletani de 
Rebus Hispan. Lib. vim, cap. xii. 

* Villanueva, Viage Literario, XXI, 131. * Fernandez y Gonzalez, p. 97. 

* See the capitulation of Valencia in 1232 (Villanueva, XVII, 331); also the 
Constitutiones Pacis et Treuge of Catalonia, in 1214, 1225, and 1228 (Marca 
Hispanica, pp. 1402, 1407, 1413), and also that of Rosellon, in 1217 (D’Achery, 
Spicileg. ITI, 587). In 1279 Pedro III of Aragon issues letters “ to all his faithful 
Moors of the frontier of Castile and Viar,” inviting them to come and populate 
Villareal, offering them the vacant lands there and pledging them security for 
all their goods (Coleccion de Documentos de la Corona de Aragon, VIII, 151). 

° Coleccion de Cédulas, V, 571, 573, 584, 600, 608, 622, 632; VI, 93, 106, 112, 
220, 292, 308, 326, 385, 455. A charter of San Fernando ITI, in 1246, selling 
certain lands to the city of Toledo, says “vendo 4 vos, concejo de Toledo, 4 los 
caballeros é al pueblo, é 4 cristianos é 4 moros é 4 judios, 4 los que sodes é 4 los 
que han de ser adelant, todos aquellos terminos, etc.’”—Ferndndez y Gonzélez, 
p. 319. 


Cuap. II] THE MUDEJARES 61 


the cleansing of irrigating canals, shows that even in petty details 
such as these there was no distinction recognized between Chris- 
tian and Moor.’ The safeguards thrown around them are seen 
in the charter of 1101, granted to the Mozdrabes of Toledo by 
Alfonso VI, permitting them the use of their ancestral Fuero 
Juzgo, but penalties under it are only to be one-fifth, as in the 
Fuero of Castile ‘‘except in cases of theft and of the murder of 
Jews and Moors,” and in the Fuero of Calatayud, granted by 
Alfonso el Batallador, in 1131, the wergild for a Jew or a Moor is 
300 sueldos, the same as for a Christian.? Yet the practice as to 
this was not strictly uniform, and the conquering race naturally 
sought to establish distinctions which should recognize its supe- 
riority. The Fuero of Madrid, in 1202, imposes various disabil- 
ities on the Moors.6 A law of Alfonso X, who throughout his 
reign showed himself favorable to the subject races, emphatically 
says that, if a Jew strikes a Christian, he is not to be punished 
according to the privileges of the Jews, but as much more severely 
as a Christian is better than a Jew; so if a Christian slays a Jew 
or a Moor he is to be punished according to the Fuero of the place, 
and if there is no provision for the case, then he is to suffer death 
or banishment or other penalty as the king may see fit, but the 
Moor who slays a Christian is to suffer more severely than a Chris- 
tian who slays a Moor or a Jew.’ 

In an age of class distinctions this was an inevitable tendency 
and it is creditable to Spanish tolerance and humanity that its 
progress was so slow. In the violence of the time there was doubt- 
less much arbitrary oppression, but the Mudéjares knew their 
rights and had no hesitation in asserting them, nor does there 
seem to have been a disposition to deny them. Thus, in 1387, 
those of Bustiella complained to Juan I that the royal tax-col- 
lectors were endeavoring to collect from them the Moorish capita- 
tion tax, to which they were not subject, having in lieu thereof 


1 Fern4ndez y Gonzalez, pp. 117, 122, 123.—Memorial histdérico espafiol, I, 
285. 

2 Coleccion de Cédulas, V, 29.—Ferndndez y Gonzdlez, p. 294. In the charter 
of Hinestrosa (1287) the wergild for homicide is 500 sueldos. In that of 
Arganzon (1191) allusion is made to the wergild of 500 sueldos, but the special 
privilege is granted that the murderer shall pay only 250, the other 250 being 
remitted “for the sake of the king’s soul.”” In the charter of Amaya (1285) the 
wergild is sixty maravedfs.—Coleccion de Cédulas, V, 222, 112, 205). 

3 Memorias de la Real Academia de la Historia, VIII, 39. 

4 Leyes de Estilo, 83, 84. 


62 THE JEWS AND THE MOORS [Book I 


from ancient times paid to the Lords of Biscay twelve hundred 
maravedis per annum and being entitled to enjoy all the fran- 
chises and liberties of Biscay, whereupon the king issued an 
order to the assessors to demand from them only the agreed sum 
and no other taxes, and to guarantee to them all the franchises 
and liberties, uses and customs of the Lordship of Biscay. Even 
more suggestive is a celebrated case occurring as late as the reign 
of Henry IV. In 1455 the chaplains of the Capella dela Cruz of 
Toledo complained to the king that the tax on all meat slaughtered 
in the town had been assigned to the chapel for its maintenance, 
but that the Moors had established their own slaughter-house and 
refused to pay the tax. Elsewhere than in Spain the matter 
would have been referred to an ecclesiastical court with a conse- 
quent decision in favor of the faith, but here it went to the civil 
court with the result that, after elaborate argument on both sides, 
in 1462 the great jurist Alfonso Diaz de Montalvan rendered a 
decision recognizing that the Moors could not eat meat slaughtered 
in the Christian fashion, that they were entitled to a slaughter- 
house of their own, free of tax, but that they must not sell meat 
to Christians and must pay the tax on all that they might thus 
have sold.? Trivial as is this case, it gives us a clear insight into 
the independence and self-assertion of the Moorish communities 
and the readiness of the courts to protect them in their rights. 
The Mudéjares were guaranteed the enjoyment of their own 
religion and laws. They had their mosques and schools and, in 
the earlier times, magistrates of their own race who decided all 
questions between themselves according to their own zunna or 
law, but suits between Christian and Moor were sometimes heard 
by a Christian judge and sometimes by a mixed bench of both 
faiths. In the capitulations it was generally provided that they 
should be subject only to the taxes exacted by their previous 
sovereigns, though in time this was apt to be disregarded.* A priv- 
ilege granted, in 1254, by Alfonso X to the inhabitants of Seville, 


1 Coleccion de Cédulas, V, 413. ; 

2 Ferndndez y Gonzalez, pp. 407, 409. By a confirmation of Pedro IV of 
Aragon, in 1372, to the aljama of Calatayud it appears that the Moors of the cities 
were accustomed to have special shambles where their meat was slaughtered and 
marked “secundum eorum ritum sive gunam.’’—Ibid. p. 384. 

3 Coleccion de Documentos de la Corona de Aragon, IV, 130; VI, 145.—Fer- 
ndndez y Gonzdlez, pp. 286, 290, 386, 389. 

* Ferndndez y Gonzalez, pp. 92, 94-5, 102. 


Cuap. IT] EFFORTS AT CONVERSION 63 


authorizing them to purchase land of Moors throughout their 
district, shows that the paternal possessions of the latter had 
been undisturbed; they were free to buy and sell real estate, and 
although, when the reactionary period commenced, toward the 
close of the thirteenth century, Sancho IV granted the petition 
of the Cortes of Valladolid in 1293, forbidding Jews and Moors to 
purchase land of Christians, the restriction soon became obsolete.' 
Not only was there no prohibition of their bearing arms, but they 
were liable to military service. Exemption from this was a special 
privilege accorded, in 1115, at the capitulation of Tudela; in 1263 
_ Jaime I of Aragon released the Moors of Masones from tribute 
and military service in consideration of an annual payment of 
1500 sweldos jaquenses; in 1283 his son Pedro III, when preparing 
to resist the invasion of Philippe le Hardi, summoned his faithful 
Moors of Valencia to join his armies and, in the levies made in 
Murcia in 1385 for the war with Portugal, each aljama had its 
assigned quota.’ 

A wise policy would have dictated the mingling of the races as 
much as possible, so as to encourage unification and facilitate the 
efforts at conversion which were never lost to sight. The con- 
verso or baptized Moor or Jew was the special favorite of the 
legislator. The Moorish law which disinherited an apostate was 
set aside and he was assured of his share in the paternal estate; 
the popular tendency to stigmatize him as a tornadizo or renegat 
was severely repressed. The Church insisted that a Moorish cap- 
tive who sincerely sought baptism should be set free. Dominicans 
and Franciscans were empowered to enter all places where Jews 
and Moors dwelt, to assemble them to listen to sermons, while the 
royal officials were directed to compel the attendance of those 
who would not come voluntarily. It is easy now to see that this 
policy, which resulted in winning over multitudes to the faith, 
would have been vastly more fruitful if the races had been com- 
pelled to associate together, and infinite subsequent misery and 


1 Archivo de Sevilla, Seccion Primera, Carpeta1, n. 49.—Ferndndez y’Gonzdlez, 
pp. 351, 353, 363.—Ordenanzas Reales, v111, iii, 31.—Memorial histdérico espafiol, 
I, 81, 152. 

? Fernandez y Gonzalez, pp. 221, 286.—Coleccion de Documentos de la Corona 
de Aragon, VI, 157, 196.—Cértes de los antiguos Reinos, II, 309. 

3 Aguirre, V, 225, 227; VI, 369.—Cap. 5 Extra v, vii—Cap. 2 Extrav. Commun. 
v, ii—Tratados de Legislacion Musulmana, p. 216 (Madrid, 1853).—Partidas, 
P. vu, Tit. xxv, leyes 2, 3.—Constitutions de Cathalunya, Lib. 1, cap. 3, 4 
(Barcelona, 1588).—Concil. Tarraconens. ann, 1245 (Aguirre, VI, 306). 


64 THE JEWS AND THE MOORS [Boox I 


misfortune would have been averted, but this was a stretch of 
tolerant humanity virtually impossible at the time. The Church, 
as will be seen, exerted every effort to keep them apart, on the 
humiliating pretext that she would lose more souls than she 
would gain, and there was, moreover, sufficient mutual distrust 
to render separation desired on both sides. Ata very early period 
of the Reconquest the policy was adopted of assigning a special 
quarter of a captured town to the Moors, and thus the habit was 
established of providing a Morerfa in the larger cities, to which 
the Mudéjares were confined. The process is well illustrated by 
what occurred at Murcia, when, in 1266, it was definitely recon- 
quered for Alfonso X by Jaime I of Aragon. He gave half the 
houses to Aragonese and Catalans and restricted the Moors to 
the quarter of the Arrijaca. Alfonso confirmed the arrangement, 
dislodging the Christians from among the Moors and building a 
wall between them. His decree on the subject recites that this 
was done at the prayer of the Moors, who were despoiled and ill- 
treated by the Christians, and who desired the protection of a 
wall, to the construction of which he devoted one-half of the 
revenues levied for the repair of the city walls. It was the same 
with the Jews, who were not to dwell among the Christians, but 
to have their Juderia set apart for them near the Orihuela gate.’ 
Besides this segregation from the Christians in the cities there 
were smaller towns in which the population was purely Moorish, 
where Christians were not allowed to dwell. That this was 
regarded as a privilege we can readily imagine, and it is shown 
by the confirmation, in 1255, by Alfonso X of an agreement with 
the Mudéjares of Moron under which they are to sell their proper- 
ties to Christians and remove to Silebar, where they are to build 
a castle and houses, to be free of all taxes for three years, 
their law is to be administered by their own alcadi and no Chris- 
tian is to reside there except the almojarije, or tax-gatherer, and 
his men. ? All this tended to perpetuate the separation between 
the Christian and the Moor, and a further potent cause is to be 
found in the horror with which miscegenation was regarded—at 
least when the male offender was a Moor. Intermarriage, of 


1 Fernandez y Gonzalez, pp. 107-8, 120, 286, 359.—Memorial histdérico espafiol, 
J, 285.—For the manner in which the houses of conquered towns were distributed 
see the Repartimiento de Jerez de la Frontera by Alfonso X in this same year 
1266, printed by Padre Fidel Fita (Boletin, Junio, 1887, pp. 465 sqq.). 

2 Ferndndez y Gonzalez, p. 346. 


Cuap. II] DENATIONALIZATION OF THE MUDEJARES 65 


course, was impossible between those of different faiths and 
illicit connections were punished in the most savage manner.’ 
In spite of this natural but impolitic segregation, the Mudé- 
jares gradually became denationalized and assimilated them- 
selves in many ways to the population by which they were sur- 
rounded. In time they forgot their native language and it 
became necessary for their learned men to compile law-books in 
Castilian for the guidance of their alcadfs. Quite a literature of 
this kind arose and, even after the final expulsion, as late as the 
middle of the seventeenth century, among the refugees in Tunis, 
a manual of religious observances was composed in Spanish, the 
author of which lamented that even the sacred characters in 
which the Koran was written were almost unknown and that the 
rites of worship were forgotten or mingled with usages and cus- 
toms borrowed from the Christians.” The Mudéjares even sym- 
pathized with the patriotic aspirations of their Castilian neighbors. 
as against their independent brethren. When, in 1340, Alfonso 
XI returned in triumph to Seville, after the overwhelming victory 
of the Rio Salado, we are told how the Moors and their women 
united with the Jews in the rejoicings which greeted the con- 
queror.* Even more practical was the response to the appeal of 
the Infante Fernando, in 1410, when he was besieging Antequera, 
one of the bulwarks of Granada, and was in great straits for 


* Coleccion de Documentos de la Corona de Aragon, VI, 255.—Partidas, P. vi, 
Tit. xxv, ley 10. 

2 Tratados de Legislacion Musulmana, p. 7 (Madrid, 1853). In this collection. 
the Leyes de los Moros probably date from about the year 1300. Ice Gebir’s: 
Suma de los principales Mandamientos was written in 1462. It would not be 
easy to find a more practical moral code than that presented in the short precepts 
assembled in Ice Gebir’s first chapter (pp. 250 sqq.). It is somewhat surprising 
to learn that in the alchihéd, or holy war against Christians, it was forbidden to- 
slay non-combatants—women, children, old men and even monks and friars 
unless they defended themselves by force (cap. xxxv, p. 333). Even harmless. 
things, such as ants and frogs, are not to be deprived of life (cap. clvii, p. 400). 
The vital reproach to be brought against Islam is the position assigned to woman 
—her degradation in her relations to man, and her scant recognition as a human 
being. In a classification of society into twelve orders, the eleventh is that of 
baldios or robbers, sorcerers, pirates, drunkards, etc., and the twelfth and lowest. 
is woman (Ib. cap. Ix, pp. 412, 415). 

8 The ballad chronicler relates how— 

Et los moros é las moras Los judfos con las toras 
Muy grandes juegos hacian, Estos Reyes bien recibian. 
Ferndndez y Gonzalez, p. 239.. 


66 THE JEWS AND THE MOORS [Boox I 


money. He wrote ‘‘muy afectuosamente” to Seville and Cér- 
dova, not only to the Christians but to the Moorish and Jewish 
aljamas and, as he was popular with them, they advanced him 
what sums they could.t. The process of denationalization and 
fusion with the Christian community was necessarily slow, but 
its progress gave gratifying promise of a result, requiring only 
wise patience and sympathy, which would have averted incal- 
culable misfortunes. 

In a financial and industrial point of view the Mudéjares 
formed a most valuable portion of the population. The revenues 
derived from them were among the most reliable resources of the 
State; assignments on them were frequently used as the safest 
and most convenient form of securing appanages and dowries and 
incomes for prelates and religious establishments.’ To the nobles 
on whose lands they were settled they were almost indispensable, 
for they were skilful agriculturists and the results of their inde- 
fatigable labors brought returns which could be realized in no 
other way. That they should be relentlessly exploited was a mat- 
ter of course. A fuero granted, in 1371, by the Almirante Ambrosio 
de Bocanegra to his Mudéjares of Palma del Rio, not only speci- 
fies their dues and taxes, but prescribes that they shall bake in 
the seignorial oven and bathe in the seignorial bath and purchase 
their necessaries in the seignorial shops.* They were not only 
_ admirable husbandmen and artificers, but distinguished them- 
selves in the higher regions of science and art. As physicians they 
ranked with the Jews, and when, in 1345, Ferrant Rodriguez, 
Prior of the Order of Santiago, built the Church of Our Lady of 
Uclés, he assembled ‘‘Moorish masters’ and good Christian 
stone-masons, who constructed it of stone and mortar.t The 
industry of Spain was to a great extent in their hands. To them 
the land owed the introduction of the sugar-cane, cotton, silk, 
the fig, the orange and the almond. Their system of irrigation, 
still maintained to the present time, was elaborately perfect, and 
they had built highways and canals to facilitate intercourse and 
transportation. Valencia, which was densely populated by Mudé- 
jares, was regarded as one of the richest provinces in Europe, pro- 
ducing largely of sugar, oil and wine. In manufacturing skill they 


1 Crénica de Juan II, afio tv, cap. 26. 

2 Coleccion de Documentos de la Corona de Aragon, VIII, 53.—Memorial 
histérico espafiol, I, 239, 263; III, 439. 

3 Ferndndez y Gonzdlez, p. 389. * Ibid. pp. 382, 386. 


Caap. IT] THE MUDEJARES 67 


were no less distinguished. Their fabrics of silk and cotton and 
linen and wool were exquisite; their potteries and porcelains were 
models for the workmen of the rest of Europe; their leather-work 
was unsurpassed; their manufactures of metals were eagerly 
sought in distant lands, while their architecture manifests their 
delicate skill and artistic taste. Marriages were arranged for 
girls at 11 and boys at 12; dowries were of little account, for a 
bed and a few coins were deemed sufficient where all were indus- 
trious and self-supporting, and their rapid increase, like evil 
weeds, was a subject of complaint to their Castilian detractors. 
_ Ingenious and laborious, sober and thrifty, a dense population - 
found livelihood in innumerable trades, in which men, women 
and children all labored, producing wealth for themselves and 
prosperity for the land. In commerce they were equally success- 
ful; they were slaves to their word, their reputation for probity 
and honor was universal, and their standing as merchants was 
proverbial. There was no beggary among them and quarrels were 
rare, differences being for the most part amicably settled without 
recourse to their judges.' 

It is not easy to set limits to the prosperity attainable by the 
Peninsula with its natural resources developed by a population 
combining the vigor of the Castilian with the industrial capacity 
of the Moor. All that was needed was Christian patience and 
good will to kindle and encourage kindly feeling between the 
conquering and the subject race; time would have done the rest. 
The infidel, won over to Christianity, would have become fused 
with the faithful, and a united people, blessed with the character- 
istics of both races, would have been ready to take the foremost 
place in the wonderful era of industrial civilization which was 


_ 1} Janer, Condicion Social de los Moriscos de Espafia, pp. 47-9, 161, 162 
(Madrid, 1857). 

Under the Saracen domination, Almeria was the chief port of Spain, crowded 
with ships from Syria and Egypt, Pisa and Genoa. It boasted of a thousand 
inns for strangers and four thousand weaving shops, besides manufactures 
of copper, iron and glass (Dozy, Recherches, I, 244-5). For the wonderful 
wealth of the Moors under the caliphs of Cérdova, showing the capacity of the 
race and of the land, see Conde’s “ Arabs in Spain,” P. u, cap. 94. How unfitted 
was the Castilian chivalry to perpetuate this prosperity is seen in a letter of 
Alfonso X in 1258, reciting how he had peopled with Christians the flourishing 
city of Alicante, as it was a stronghold and one of the best seaports; how the 
allotment of lands had given dissatisfaction and on investigation he had found 
that the Christians could not live and prosper there, wherefore he now makes a 
new repartimiento (Memorial histérico espafiol, I, 135). 


68 THE JEWS AND THE MOORS [Boox I 


about to open. Unhappily for Spain this was not to be. To the 
conscientious churchman of the Middle Ages any compact with 
the infidel was a league with Satan; he could not be forcibly 
brought into the fold, but it was the plainest of duties to render 
his position outside so insupportable that he would take refuge 
in conversion. 

The Church accordingly viewed with repugnance the policy 
of conciliation and toleration which had so greatly facilitated the 
work of the Reconquest, and it lost no opportunity of exciting 
popular distrust and contempt for the Mudéjares. We shall see 
how great was its success with respect to the Jews, whose position 
offered better opportunity for attack, but it was not without 
results as respects the Moors. It discouraged all intercourse 
between the races and endeavored to keep them separate. Even 
the indispensable freedom of ordinary commercial dealings, which 
was provided for by the secular rulers, was frowned upon, and in 
1250 the Order of Santiago was obliged to represent to Innocent 
IV that it had Moorish vassals, and to supplicate him for license 
to buy and sell with them, which he graciously permitted. The 
most efficacious means, however, of establishing and perpetuating 
the distinction between the races was that Jews and Moors 
should wear some peculiar garment or badge by which they should 
be recognized at sight. This was not only a mark of inferiority 
and a stigma, but it exposed the wearer to insults and outrages, 
rendering it both humiliating and dangerous, especially to those, 
such as muleteers or merchants, whose avocations rendered travel 
on the unsafe highways indispensable. When the Church was 
aroused from its torpor to combat infidelity in all its forms, this 
was one of the measures adopted by the great council of Lateran 
in 1216, in a regulation carried into the canon law, the reason 
alleged being that it was necessary to prevent miscegenation.’ 


1 Fernandez y Gonzalez, pp. 294, 321, 367. Cf. Concil. Vallisolet. ann. 1322, 
cap. xxii; C. Toletan. ann. 1324, cap. viii (Aguirre, V, 251, 259); Concil. Pari- 
siensis, ann. 1212, Addend. cap. i (Martene Ampliss. Collect. VII, 1420). 

? Concil. Lateran. IV, ann. 1216, cap. Ixviii (cap. 15, Extra, v, vi). This device 
originated among the Saracens of the East, who, in the eleventh century, required 
Jews and Christians to wear distinctive badges (Ferndndez y Gonzalez, p. 16). 
The earliest trace of it in the West is found in the charter of Alais, in 1200, which 
prescribes distinctive vestments for Jews (Robert, Les Signes d’Infamie au 
Moyen Age, p. 7). In Italy, Frederic II obeyed the Lateran decree by ordering, 
in 1221, all Jews to wear distinguishing garments (Richardi de 8S. German. Chron. 
ap. Muratori, S. R. I., VII, 993), but he did not insert this in the Sicilian Consti- 


Cuap. IT] DISTINCTIVE BADGES 69 


In 1217 Honorius III peremptorily ordered the enforcement of 
this decree in Castile, but, two years later, consented to suspend 
it, on the remonstrance of San Fernando III, backed by Rodrigo, 
Archbishop of Toledo. The king represented that many Jews 
would abandon his kingdom rather than wear badges, while the 
rest would be driven to plots and conspiracies, and, as the greater 
part of his revenues was derived from them, he would be unable 
to carry out his enterprises against the Saracens.’ It was difficult 
to arouse intolerance and race hatred in Spain, and, when Gregory 
IX, about 1233, and Innocent IV, in 1250, ordered the Castilian 
prelates to enforce the Lateran canons, San Fernando quietly dis- 
regarded the injunction.” His son, Alfonso X, so far yielded 
obedience that, in the Partidas, he ordered, under a penalty of ten 
gold maravedis or ten lashes, all Jews, male and female, to wear 
a badge on the cap, alleging the same reason as the Lateran coun- 
cil, but he did not extend this to the Moors and, as his code was 
not confirmed by the Cortes for nearly a century, the regulation 
may be regarded as inoperative.* The council of Zamora, which 
did so much to stimulate intolerance, in January, 1313, ordered 
the badge to be worn, as it was in other lands, and later in the 
year the Cértes of Plasencia proposed to obey, but were told by 
the Infante Juan, who presided as guardian of Alfonso XI, that 
he would, after consultation, do what was for the advantage of 
the land. In Aragon, the councils of Tarragona, in 1288 and 
1282, vainly ordered the canon to be obeyed, and it was not until 
1300 that the attempt was made with an ordinance requiring the 
Mudéjares to wear the hair cut in a peculiar fashion that should 
be distinctive.’ In Castile, at length, Henry II, in pursuance of 
the request of the Cértes of Toro in 13871, ordered all Jews and 
Moors to wear the badge (a red circle on the left shoulder), but 


tutions or include his Saracen subjects. In 1254 the council of Albi prescribed 
for Jews a circle, a finger-breadth in width, to be worn upon the breast, and that 
of Ravenna, in 1311, a yellow circle (Harduin. VII, 458, 1370). In the fifteenth 
century, the Neapolitan Jews were required to wear asa sign the Hebrew letter 
Tau (Wadding, Annal. Minor. T. III, Regest. p. 392). 

1 Raynald. Annal. ann. 1217, n. 84.—Amador de los Rios, Hist. de los Judfos 
de Espafia, I, 361-2, 554. 

2 Amador de los Rios, I, 362, 364. 

*yPartidas, P. vu, Tit. xxiv, ley 11. 

* Cértes de los antiguos Reinos, I, 227. 

* Concil. Tarraconens. ann. 1238, cap.iv; ann. 1282, cap. v (Martene Ampliss. 
Collect. VIII, 132, 280).—Ferndndez y Gonzdlez, p. 369.—Constitutions de 
Cathalunya superfluas, Lib. 1, Tit. v, cap. 12 (Barcelona, 1589, p. 8). 


70 THE JEWS AND THE MOORS [Boox I 


the injunction had to be frequently repeated and was slenderly 
obeyed. Even so, to it may be attributed the frequent murders 
which followed of Jews on the highways, the perpetrators of 
which were rarely identified.t 

What was the spirit which the Church thus persistently endeav- 
ored to arouse in Spain may be gathered from a brief of Clement 
IV, in 1266, to Jaime I of Aragon, urging him to expel all 
Mudéjares from his dominions. He assures the king that his 
reputation will suffer greatly if, for temporal advantage, he longer 
permits such opprobrium of God, such an infection of Christen- 
dom, as proceeds indubitably from the horrible cohabitation of 
the Moors, with its detestable horrors and horrid foulness. By 
expelling them he will fulfil his vow to God, stop the mouths of 
his detractors and prove himself zealous for the faith.2, The same 
temper was shown, in 1278, by Nicholas III, when he scolded 
Alfonso X for entering into truces with the Moors, and, by threat- 
ening to deprive him of the share granted to him of the church 
revenues, incited him to the disastrous siege of Algeciras, the 
failure of which led him to form an alliance with the King of 
Morocco.? Fortunately this papal zeal for the faith found no 
Ximenes in Spain to spread it among the people and to kindle the 
fires of intolerance. The Spanish Church of the period appears 
to have been wholly quiescent. The only action on record is the 
trivial one of Arnaldo de Peralta, Bishop of Valencia, from 1261 
to 1273, who forbade, under pain of excommunication, his clergy 
from drinking wine in the house of a Jew, provided they should 
have heard of or should remember the prohibition; and he further 
vaguely threatened with his displeasure any cleric who should 
knowingly buy the wine of a Jew, except in case of necessity.’ 


1 Ayala, Crénica de Enrique II, afio v1, cap. vii.—Cértes de los antiguos 
Reinos, II, 281. 

7 Ripoll Bullar. Ord. FF. Preedic. I, 479. It was apparently in return for a 
tithe of ecclesiastical revenues that Jaime pledged himself to the pope to expel 
the Moors, but he was too wise a statesman to do so, and as late as 1275 he 
invited additional settlers by the promise of a year’s exemption from taxation. 
On his death-bed in 1276, however, partly, no doubt in consequence of a danger- 
ous Moorish revolt, and partly owing to the awakened fears shown by his taking 
the Cistercian habit, he enjoined his son Pedro to fulfil the promise, and ina 
codicil to his will he emphatically repeated the request (Danvila y Collado, La 
Expulsion de los Moriscos, p. 24.—-Swift, James the First of Aragon, pp. 140, 
253, 290), but Pedro was obdurate. 

° Ferndndez y Gonzalez, p. 109. * Constitt. Valentin. (Aguirre, V, 206). 


Cuap. IT] INFLUENCE OF THE CHURCH 71} 


That, in the confusion which followed the rebellion of Sancho 
IV against his father, there may have arisen a desire to limit 
somewhat the privileges of Jew and Moor is rendered probable 
by the legislation of the Cortes of Valladolid, in 1293, to which 
allusion has already been made (p. 63), but the decisive impulse 
which aroused the Spanish Church from its indolent indifference 
and set it earnestly to work in exciting popular hatred and intol- 
erance, would seem traceable to the council of Vienne in 1311-12. 
Among the published canons of the council, the only one relating 
to Moors is a complaint that those dwelling in Christian lands 
_ have their priests, called Zabazala, who, from the minarets of their 
mosques, at certain hours invoke Mahomet and sound his praises 
in a loud voice, and also that they are accustomed to gather 
around the grave of one whom they worship as a saint. These 
practices are denounced as unendurable, and the princes are 
ordered to suppress them, with the alternative of gaining salva- 
tion or of enduring punishment which shall make them serve as 
a terrifying example.’ This threat fell upon deaf ears. In 13829 
the council of Tarragona complains of its inobservance and orders 
all temporal lords to enforce it within two months, under pain of 
interdict and excommunication,’ and a hundred years later the 
council of Tortosa, in 1429, supplicated the King of Aragon and 
all prelates and nobles, by the bowels of divine mercy, to enforce 
the canon and all other conciliar decrees for the exaltation of 
the faith and the humiliation of Jews and Moors, and to cause 
their observance by their subjects if they wish to escape the ven- 
geance of God and of the Holy See. This was equally ineffectual, 
and it was reserved for Ferdinand and Isabella, about 1482, to 
enforce the canon of Vienne with a SON) which br ought a remon- 
strance from the Grand Turk.® 

More serious was the effect upon the Jews of the spirit awakened 
at Vienne. That council, besides enacting very severe laws 
against usury, denounced the privilege accorded in Spain to Jews, 
whereby Jewish witnesses were requisite for the conviction of 
Jewish defendants. It did not presume to annul this privilege, 


1 Cap. 1 Clementin. Lib. v, Tit. ii. 

? Concil. Tarraconens. ann. 1329 (Aguirre, VI, 370). 

* Concil. Dertusan. ann. 1429, cap. xx (Aguirre, V, 340).—Raynald. Annal. 
ann. 1483, n. 45. 

In 1370 the Carta Puebla granted by Buenaventura de Arborea to the Mantes 
of Chelva specifically allowed their alfaqufes to cry Al4 Zaldé as was their wont 
in the time of Pedro, her late husband.—Ferndndez y Gonzalez, p. 386. 


72, THE JEWS AND THE MOORS [Boox I 


but forbade all intercourse between the races wherever it was in 
force. The Spanish prelates, in returning from the council in 
1312, brought with them these canons and the spirit of intolerance 
that dictated them and made haste to give expression to it at the 
council of Zamora, in January, 13138, in a number of canons, the 
temper of which isso different from the previous utterances of the 
Spanish Church that it shows the revolution wrought in their 
mode of thinking by intercourse with their brethren from other 
lands. Henceforth, in this respect, the Spanish Church emerges 
from its isolation and distinguishes itself by even greater ferocity 
than that which disgraced the rest of Christendom. The fathers 
of Zamora invoked the curse of God and of St. Peter on all who 
should endeavor to enforce the existing laws requiring the evi- 
dence of Jews to convict Jews. They denounced the Jews as 
serpents, who were only to be endured by Christians because they 
were human beings, but were to be kept in strict subjection and 
servitude, and they sought to reduce this principle to practice by 
a series of canons restricting the Jews in every way and putting 
an end to all social intercourse between them and Christians.? 
The friendly mingling of the races, which shows how little the 
prejudices of the churchmen were shared by the people at this 
period, became a favorite subject of objurgation and required a 
long series of efforts to eradicate, but the Church triumphed at 
last, and the seeds of envy, hatred and all uncharitableness, which 
it so assiduously planted and cultivated, yielded in the end an 
abundant harvest of evil. What prepossessions of Christian 
kindness the prelates of Zamora felt that they had to overcome 
are indicated in the final command that these constitutions 


1 Cap. 1 Clementin. Lib. un, Tit. viii; Lib. v, Tit. v. 

? Although the acts of the council of Zamora were fully confirmed by the 
Cértes of Palencia in 1313 (Cértes de los antiguos Reinos, I, 227, 240-1), it 
seemed impossible to enforce them. In 1331 the Cértes of Madrid ineffectually 
petitioned that Christians denying debts to Jews could offer another Christian 
as a witness and not be obliged to havea Jew. The Fuero Viejo de Castiella, as 
revised in 1356, however, grants the privilege (Lib. 111, Tit. iv, ley 19). The 
editors of the Fuero, Asso and Manuel (Ed. 1847, p. 83) say that the practice 
varied, and that Henry III, in the Cértes of Madrid, in 1405, again granted the 
privilege. As early as 1263 Alfonso X had enacted that in mixed suits a Jew 
could not demand that his opponent should produce as witnesses a Christian and 
a Jew, but that the evidence of two good Christians should suffice.—Memorial 
histérico espafiol, I, 207. The point has interest as an evidence of the desire to 
protect Jews from imposition. 


Cuap. IT] INFLUENCE OF THE CHURCH 73 


should be read publicly in all churches annually, and that the 
bishops should compel by excommunication all secular magis- 
trates to enforce them.’ 

The Spanish Church, thus fairly started in this deplorable 
direction, pursued its course with characteristic energy. In 1322 
the utterances of the council of Valladolid reveal how intimate 
were the customary relations between Christian and infidel, and 
how the Church, in place of taking advantage of this, labored to 
keep the races asunder. The council recites that scandals arise 
and churches are profaned by the prevailing custom of Moors and 
Jews attending divine service, wherefore they are to be expelled 
before the ceremonies of the mass begin, and all who endeavor to 
prevent it are to be excommunicated. The habit of nocturnal 
devotional vigils in churches is also said, probably with truth, 
to be the source of much evil, and all who bring Moors and Jews 
to take part with their voices and instruments are to be expelled. 
To preserve the faithful from pollution by Moorish and Jewish 
superstitions, they are commanded no more to frequent the wed- 
dings and funerals of the infidels. The absurd and irrational abuse 
whereby Jews and Moors are placed in office over Christians is to 
be extirpated, and all prelates shall punish it with excommunica- 
tion. As the malice of Moors and Jews leads them.craftily to put 
Christians to death, under pretext of curing them by medicine and 
surgery and, as the canons forbid Christians from employing 
them as physicians, and as these canons are not observed in con- 
sequence of the negligence of the prelates, the latter are ordered 
to enforce them strictly with the free use of excommunication.’ 

These last two clauses point to matters which had long been 
special grievances of the faithful and which demand a moment’s 
attention. The superior administrative abilities of the Jews 
caused them to be constantly sought for executive positions, to 
the scandal of all good Christians. We have seen that under the 
Goths it was an abuse calling for constant animadversion. It was 
one of the leading complaints of Innocent III against Raymond 
VI of Toulouse, which he expiated so cruelly in the Albigensian 
crusades, and one of the decrees of the Lateran council was 
directed against its continuance.’ In Spain the sovereigns could 


1 Amador de los Rios, I, 561-5. 

? Concil. Vallisolet. ann. 1322, cap. xxii (Aguirre, V, 250). 

3 Innocent. PP. III, Regest. x, 69; x11, post Epist. 107.—Concil. Lateran. IV, 
cap. lxix (cap. 16, Extra, v, vi). 


74 THE JEWS AND THE MOORS [Boox I 


not do without them, and we shall have occasion to see that it 
became one of the main causes of popular dislike of the unfortu- 
nate race, for the Christian found it hard to bear with equanimity 
the domination of the Jew, especially in his ordinary character of 
almojarife, or tax-collector. As early as 1118, Alfonso VIII, in 
the fuero granted to Toledo, promised that no Jew or recent con- 
vert should be placed over the Christians; Alfonso X made the 
same concession in the fuero of Alicante, in 1252, except that he 
reserved the office of almojarife, and in the Partidas he endeav- 
ored to make the rule general.’ The same necessity made itself 
felt with regard to the function of the physician, for which, during 
the dark ages, the learning of Jew and Saracen rendered them 
almost exclusively fitted. Zedechias, the Jewish physician of the 
Emperor Charles the Bald, was renowned, and tradition handed 
down his name as that of a skilful magician.? Prince and prelate 
alike sought comfort in their curative ministrations, and, as the 
Church looked askance on the practice of medicine and surgery 
by ecclesiastics, unless it were through prayer and exorcism, they 
had the field almost to themselves. This had always been 
regarded with disfavor by the Church. As early as 706 the council 
of Constantinople had ordered the faithful not to take medicine 
from a Jew, -and this command had been incorporated in the 
canon law.’ Another rule, adopted from the Lateran council of 
1216, was that the first duty of a physician was to care for the 
soul of the patient rather than for his body, and to see that he was 
provided with a confessor—a duty which the infidel could scarce 
be expected to recognize.* It is therefore easy to understand why 
the general abhorrence of the Church for Moor and Jew should be 
sharpened with peculiar acerbity in regard to their functions as 
physicians; why the council of Valladolid should endeavor to 
alarm the people with the assertion that they utilized the position 
to slay the faithful, and the council of Salamanca, in 1335, should 
renew the sentence of excommunication on all who should employ 
them in sickness.” Nominally the Church carried its point, and 


* Fernandez y Gonzalez, p. 289.—Coleccion de Privilegios, VI, 97.—Partidas, 
P.; wir; Titsoexiv, dey 3: 

? Annal. Novesiens. ann. 846 (Martene Ampliss. Collect. IV, 538). Cf. Gest. 
Episc. Leodiens. Lib. 11, cap. 41.—Hist. Treverens. (D’Achery Spicileg. II, 222). 

§ Concil. Quinisext. cap. xi.—Gratian. cap. 13, Caus. xxviii, Q. 1. 

4 Cap. 13, Extra,v; xxxviil. 

§ Concil. Salmanticens. ann. 1335, cap. xii (Aguirre, V, 269). 


Cuap. IT] INFLUENCE OF THE CHURCH 16 


in the proscriptive laws of 1412 there was embodied a provision 
imposing a fine of three hundred maravedis on any Moor or Jew 
who should visit a Christian in sickness or administer medicine to 
him,* but the prohibition was impossible of enforcement. About 
1462, the Franciscan, Alonso de Espina, bitterly complains that 
there is not a noble or a prelate but keeps a Jewish devil as a 
physician, although the zeal of the Jews in studying medicine is 
simply to obtain an opportunity of exercising their malignity 
upon Christians; for one whom they cure they slay fifty, and 
when they are gathered together they boast as to which has. 
- caused the most deaths, for their law commands them to spoil 
and slay the faithful. It was but a few years after this that. 
Abiatar Aben Crescas, chief physician of Juan II of Aragon, the 
father of Ferdinand, vindicated Jewish science by successfully 
relieving his royal patient of a double cataract and restoring his 
sight. On September 11, 1469, pronouncing the aspect of the 
stars to be favorable, he operated on the right eye; the king, 
delighted with his recovered vision, ordered him to proceed with 
the left, but Abiatar refused, alleging that the stars had become. 
unfavorable, and it was not until October 12 that he consented 
to complete the cure.’ The friars themselves believed as little as. 
royalty in the stories which they invented to frighten the people 
and create abhorrence of Jewish physicians. In spite of the fact. 
that Ferdinand and Isabella, in the Ordenanzas of 1480, repeated 
the prohibition of their attending Christians, the Dominicans, in 
1489, obtained from Innocent IV permission to employ them, not-- 
withstanding all ecclesiastical censures, the reason alleged being 
that in Spain there were few others.‘ 

The proscriptive spirit which dominated the councils of Zamora. 
and Valladolid was not allowed to die out. That of Tarragona, in 
1329, expressed its horror at the friendly companionship with 
which Christians were in the habit of attending the marriages, 
funerals and circumcisions of Jews and Moors and even of entering 
into the bonds of compaternity with the parents at the latter 


1 Ordenamiento de Dofia Catalina, n. 10. 

? Fortalicium Fidei, fol. 1478 (Ed. 1494). 

8 Mariana, Hist. de Espafia, VIII, 69 (Ed. 1790). 

* Ordenanzas Reales, vii, iii, 18.—Ripoll Bullar. Ord. FF. Predic. IV, 44. 
As recently as 1580 Gregory XIII recited the prohibitions of employing Jewish 
physicians uttered by Paul IV and Pius V and deplored their inobservance which 
precipitated many souls to damnation, to prevent which he ordered their strict. 
enforcement.—Septimi Decretal. Lib. 111, Tit. vi, cap. 2. 


76 THE JEWS AND THE MOORS [Boox I 


ceremony, all of which it strictly forbade for the future." A few 
years later, in 13837, Arnaldo, Archbishop of Tarragona, addressed 
to Benedict XII a letter which is a significant expression of the 
objects and methods of the Church. In spite, he says, of the 
vow taken by Jaime I when about to conquer Valencia, that he 
would not permit any Moors to remain there, the Christians, led 
by blind cupidity, allow them to occupy the land, believing that 
thus they derive larger revenues—which is an error, as the Abbot 
of Poblet has recently demonstrated by expelling the Mudéjares 
from the possessions of the abbey. There are said to be forty or 
fifty thousand Moorish fighting men in Valencia, which is a source 
of the greatest danger, especially now when the Emperor of 
Morocco is preparing to aid the King of Granada. Besides, many 
enormous crimes are committed by Christians, in consequence of 
their damnable familiarity and intercourse with the Moors, who 
blaspheme the name of Christ and exalt that of Mahomet. ‘‘I 
have heard,” he pursues, ‘‘ the late Bishop of Valencia declare, in 
a public sermon, that in that province the mosques are more 
numerous than the churches and that half, or more than half, the 
people are ignorant of the Lord’s prayer and speak only Moorish. 
I therefore pray your clemency to provide an appropriate remedy, 
which would seem impossible unless the Moors are wholly expelled 
and unless the King of Aragon lends his aid and favor. The nobles 
would be more readily brought to assent to this if they were 
allowed to seize and sell the persons and property of the Mudé- 
jares as public enemies and infidels, and the money thus obtained 
would be of no small service in defending the kingdom.” The 
Christian prelate, not content with directly asking the pope to 
adopt this inhuman proposition, sent a copy of his letter to Jean 
de Comminges, Cardinal of Porto, and begged him to urge the 
matter with Benedict, and in a second letter to the cardinal he 
explained that it would be necessary for the pope to order the 
king to expel the Moors; that he would willingly obey as to the 
crown lands, but that a papal command was indispensable as to 
the lands of others. It was only, he added, the avarice of the 
Christians which kept the Moors there.” We shall see how, two 
hundred and seventy years later, an Archbishop of Valencia 
aided in bringing about the final catastrophe, by a still greater 


1 Concil. Tarraconens. ann. 1329 (Aguirre, VI, 371). 
? Aguirre, V, 286-7. Pedro el Ceremonioso, the King of Aragon, was then 
only a boy of eighteen, who had ascended the throne in January, 1336. 


Cuap. IT] REPRESSIVE LEGISLATION ey. 


display of saintly zeal, backed by precisely the same argu- 
ments. 

This constant pressure on the part of their spiritual guides 
began to make an impression on the ruling classes, and repressive 
legislation becomes frequent in the Cortes. In those of Soria, in 
1380, the obnoxious prayer against Christians was ordered to be 
removed from Jewish prayer-books and its recitation was for- 
bidden under heavy penalties, while the rabbis were deprived of 
jurisdiction in criminal cases between their people. In those of 
Valladolid, in 1385, Christians were forbidden to live among Jews, 
Jews were prohibited to serve as tax-collectors, their judges were 
inhibited to act in civil cases between them and Christians and 
numerous regulations were adopted to restrain their oppression 
of debtors.’ In 1387, at the Cortes of Briviesca, Juan I enacted 
that no Christian should keep in his house a Jew or Moor, except 
as a slave, nor converse with one beyond what the law allowed, 
under the heavy penalty of 6000 maravedis, and no Jew or Moor 
should keep Christians in his house under pain of confiscation of 
all property and corporal punishment at the king’s pleasure.” It 
seemed impossible to enforce these laws, and the Church inter- 
vened by assuming jurisdiction over the matter. In 1388 the 
council of Valencia required the suspension of labor on Sundays 
and feast-days, and it deplored the injury to the bodies and souls 
of the faithful and the scandals arising from the habitual inter- 
course between them and the infidels. The dwellings of the latter 
were ordered to be strictly separated from those of the former; 
where special quarters had not been assigned to them, it was 
ordered to be done forthwith and, within two months, no Chris- 
tian should be found dwelling with them nor they with Christians. 
If they had trades to work at or merchandise to sell they could 
come out during the day, or occupy booths or shops along the 
streets, but at night they must return to the place where they 
kept their wives and children.® 

This segregation of the Jews and Moors and their strict con- 
finement to the Morerias and Juderfas were a practical method 
of separating the races which was difficult of enforcement. The 
massacres of 1391 showed that there were such quarters generally 
in the larger cities, but residence therein seems not to have been 


1 Cértes de los antiguos Reinos, II, 311, 322-8. 
2 Ordenanzas Reales, vitt, iii, 6. 
§ Concil. Palentin. ann. 1388, cap. v, vi (Aguirre, V, 300). 


78 THE JEWS AND THE MOORS [Boox I 


obligatory, and Jews and Moors who desired it lived among the 
Christians. In the restrictive laws of 1412, the first place is given 
to this matter. Morerfas and Juderias are ordered to be estab- 
lished everywhere, surrounded with a wall having only one gate. 
Any one who shall not, in eight days after notice, have settled 
therein forfeits all his property and is liable to punishment at the 
king’s pleasure, and severe penalties are provided for Christian 
women who enter them.’ An effort was made to enforce these 
regulations, but it seemed impossible to keep the races apart. In 
1480 Ferdinand and Isabella state that the law had not been 
observed and order its enforcement, allowing two years for the 
establishment of the ghettos, after which no Jew or Moor shall 
dwell outside of them, under the established penalties, and no 
Christian woman be found within them.’ The time had passed for 
laws to be disregarded and this was carried into effect with the 
customary vigor of the sovereigns. In Segovia, for instance, on 
October 29, 1481, Rodrigo Alvarez Maldonado, commissioner for 
the purpose, summoned the representatives of the Jewish aljama, 
read to them the Ordenanza, and designated to them the limits 
of their Juderia. All Christians resident therein were warned to 
vacate within the period designated by the law; all Jews of the 
district were required to make their abode there within the same 
time, and all doors and windows of houses contiguous to the 
boundaries, on either side, whether of Jews or Christians, were 
ordered to be walled up or rendered impassable. The segregation 
of the Jews was to be absolute.’ 


We shall see in the next chapter how successful were the efforts: 
of the Church in arousing the greed and fanaticism of the people: 
and in repressing the kindly fellowship which had so long existed. 
From this the Jews were the earliest and greatest sufferers, and 
it is necessary here to say only that in the cruel laws which marked 
the commencement of the fifteenth century both Moor and Jew 
were included in the restrictions designed to humiliate them to: 
the utmost, to render their lives a burden, to deprive them of the 


1 Ordenamiento de Valladolid, i, xi (Fortalicium Fidei, fol. 176).—Ferndéndez 
y Gonzalez, pp. 400, 402. 

? Ordenanzas Reales, vitr, iii, 10, 19. 

3 Padre Fidel Fita, Boletin, IX, 270-84, 289, 292.—It was not until 1555 that 
Paul IV adopted the same policy in Rome and established the Ghetto, or Jewish. 
quarter.—Septimi Decretal. Lib. v, Tit. 1, cap. 4 


Cuap. IT] REPRESSIVE LEGISLATION 79 


means of livelihood and to diminish their usefulness to the State. 
These laws were too severe for strict and continuous enforcement, 
but they answered the purpose of inflicting an ineffaceable stigma 
upon their victims and of keeping up a wholesome feeling of antag- 
onism on the part of the population at large. This was directed 
principally against the Jews, who were the chief objects of clerical 
malignity, and it will be our business to examine how this was 
skilfully developed, until it became the proximate cause of the 
introduction of the Inquisition and created for it, during its 
earliest and busiest years, almost the sole field of its activity. 
_ Meanwhile it may be observed that, in the closing triumph over 
Granada, the capitulations accorded by Ferdinand and Isabella 
were even more liberal to Jews and Moors than those granted 
from the eleventh to the thirteenth century, by such monarchs 
as Alfonso VI, Ferdinand III, Alfonso X, and Jaime I. Unless 
they were deliberately designed as perfidious traps, they show 
how little real conscientious conviction lay behind the elaborately 
stimulated fanaticism which destroyed the Jews and Mudéjares.’ 


1 For a series of these capitulations see Coleccion de Documentos para la, 
Historia de Espafia, T. VIII, pp. 403 sqq. 


CHAP hina TT 


THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS. 


To appreciate properly the position of the Jews in Spain, it 
is requisite first to understand the light in which they were 
regarded elsewhere throughout Christendom during the medie- 
val period. It has already been seen that the Church held the 
Jew to be a being deprived, by the guilt of his ancestors, of all 
natural rights save that of existence. The privileges accorded 
to the Jews and the social equality to which they were admitted 
under the Carlovingians provoked the severest animadver- 
sions of the churchmen.* About 890, Stephen VI writes to 
the Archbishop of Narbonne that he has heard with mortal 
anxiety that these enemies of God are allowed to hold land 
and that Christians dealt with these dogs and even rendered 
service to them.’ It is true that Alexander III maintained the 
ancient rule that they could repair their existing synagogues 
but not build new ones, and Clement III honored himself by 
one of the rare human utterances in their favor, prohibiting 
their forced conversion, their murder or wounding or spolia- 
tion, their deprivation of religious observances, the exaction 
of forced service unless such was customary, or the violation 
of their cemeteries in search of treasure, and, moreover, both 
of these decrees were embodied by Gregory IX in the canon 
law.2 Yet these prohibitions only point out to us the manner 
in which popular zeal applied the principles enunciated by the 
Church and, when the council of Paris, in 1212, forbade, under 
pain of excommunication, Christian midwives to attend a Jewess 
in labor, it shows that they were authoritatively regarded as 
less entitled than beasts to human sympathy.‘ 

How popular hostility was aroused and strengthened is illus- 
trated in a letter addressed, in 1208, by Innocent III to the Count 


* S. Agobardi de Judaicis Superstitionibus; Ejusdem de cavenda Societate 
Judaica.—Amulonis Episc. Lugdunens. Lib. contra Judeeos ad Carolem Regem. 
? Stephani PP. VI, Epist. 2. Cap. 7,\9,: Extra, Lib: v,: Tits yi 
* Concil. Paris. ann. 1212, P. v, cap. 2 (Martene Ampliss. Collect. VII, 102). 

6 (81) 


82 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


of Nevers. Although, he says, the Jews, against whom the 
blood of Jesus Christ cries aloud, are not to be slain, lest Chris- 
tians should forget the divine law, yet are they to be scattered 
as wanderers over the earth, that their faces may be filled with 
ignominy and they may seek the name of Jesus Christ. Blas- 
phemers of the Christian name are not to be cherished by princes, 
in oppression of the servants of the Lord, but are rather to be 
repressed with servitude, of which they rendered themselves 
worthy when they laid sacrilegious hands on Him, who had 
come to give them true freedom, and they cried that His blood 
should be upon them and their children. Yet when prelates 
and priests intervene to crush their malice, they laugh at excom- 
munication and nobles are found who protect them. The Count 
of Nevers is said to be a defender of the Jews; if he does not 
dread the divine wrath, Innocent threatens to lay hands on 
him and punish his disobedience.t The Cistercian Czsarius of 
Heisterbach, in his dialogues for the moral instruction of his 
fellow monks, tells several stories which illustrate the utter 
contempt felt for the feelings and rights of Jews, and in one of 
them there is an allusion to the curious popular belief that the 
Jews had a vile odor, which they lost in baptism—a belief pro- 
longed, at least in Spain, until the seventeenth century was 
well advanced.? Even so enlightened a prelate as Cardinal 
Pierre d’Ailly, in 1416, reproves the sovereigns of Christendom 
for their liberality towards the Jews, which he can attribute 
only to the vile love of gain; if Jews are allowed to remain, it 
should be only as servants to Christians.* General prohibitions 
of maltreatment availed little when prelate and priest were 
busy in inflaming popular aversion and popes were found to 
threaten any prince hardy enough to interpose and protect the 
unfortunate race. 

Of course under such impulsion there was scant ceremony 
in dealing with these outcasts in any way that religious ardor 
might suggest. When, in 1009, the Saracens captured Jerusa- 


1 Innocent. PP. III], Regest. x, 190. Cf. Epistt. Select. Sec. XIII, T. I, p. 
414 (Pertz). 

2 Cesar. Heisterb. Dial. Mirac. Dist. 0, cap. xxiv, xxv.—Bernaldez, Hist. de 
los Reyes Catdlicos, cap. xliiii—Vicente da Costa Mattos, Breve Discurso contra 
a heretica Perfidia do Judaismo, fol. 131, 132, 134 (Lisboa, 1623).—Bodleian 
Library, MSS. Arch. 8. 130. 

3 P, de Alliaco Canon. Reformat. cap. xliii (Von der Hardt, Concil. Constant. 
I, vir, 4380-1) 


— a Ce 


Cap. IIT] MEDIEVAL PERSECUTION 83 


lem and destroyed the church of the Holy Sepulchre, the rage 
and indignation of Europe assumed so threatening a form that 
multitudes of Jews took refuge in baptism." When religious 
exaltation culminated in the Crusades, it seemed to those who 
assumed the cross a folly to redeem Palestine while leaving 
behind the impious race that had crucified the Lord, and every- 
where, in 1096, the assembling of crusaders was the signal for 
Jewish massacre. It would be superfluous to recount in detail 
the dreary catalogue of wholesale slaughters which for centuries 
disgraced Europe, whenever fanaticism or the disappearance 
of a child gave rise to stories of the murder rite, or a blood- 
stained host suggested sacrilege committed on the sacrament, 
or some passing evil, such as an epidemic, aroused the populace | 
to bloodshed and rapine. The medieval chronicles are full of 
such terrible scenes, in which cruelty and greed assumed the 
cloak of zeal to avenge God; and when, in rare instances, the 
authorities protected the defenceless, it was ascribed to un- 
worthy motives, as in the case of Johann von Kraichbau, Bishop 
of Speyer, who, in 1096, not only saved some Jews but beheaded 
their assailants and was accused of being heavily bribed; nor 
did Frederic Barbarossa and Ludwig of Bavaria escape similar 
imputations.” It was safer and more profitable to combine 
piety and plunder as when, in April, 1182, Philip Augustus 
ordered all Jews to leave France by St. John’s day, confiscating 
their landed property and allowing them to take their personal 
effects. His grandson, the saintly Louis, resorted without 
scruple to replenishing his treasury by ransoming the Jews and 
the latter’s grandson, Philippe le Bel, was still more unscrupu- 
lous in 1306, when, by a concerted movement, he seized all the 
Jews in his dominions, stripped them of property, and banished 
them under pain of death. In England King John, in 1210, 
cast Jews into prison and tortured them for ransom, and his 
grandson, Edward I, followed the example of Philip Augustus 
so effectually that Jews were not allowed to return until the 
time of Cromwell.’ 


‘ Chron. Turonens. ann. 1009. 

2 Berthold. Constant. ann. 1096.—Otton. Frisingens. de Gest. Frid. I, Lib. 1, 
cap. 37.—Vitoduran. Chron. ann. 1336.—Gesta Treviror. Archiepp. ann. 1337. 

5 Rigord. de Gest. Phil. Aug. ann. 1182 —Vaissette, Hist. Gen. de Languedoc, 
VIII, 1191-2 (Ed. Privat).—Nich. Trivetti Chron. ann. 1189.—Guill. Nangiac. 
Contin. ann. 1306.—Matt. Paris. Hist. Angl. ann. 1210.—Matt. Westmonast. 
ann. 1290. 


84 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


‘Spain remained so long isolated from the movements which 
agitated the rest of Christendom that the abhorrence for the 
Jew, taught by the Church and reduced to practice in so many 
ways by the people, was late in development. In the deluge 
of the Saracen conquest and in the fierce struggles of the early 
Reconquest, the antipathy so savagely expressed in the Gothic 
legislation seemed to pass away, possibly because there could 
have been but few Jews among the rude mountaineers of Galicia 
and Asturias. It is true that the Wisigothic laws, in the Romance 
version known as the Fuero Juzgo, remained nominally in force; 
it is also true that a law was interpolated in the Fuero, which 
seems to indicate a sudden recrudescence of fanaticism after a 
long interval of comparative toleration. It provides that if a 
Jew loyally embraces the faith of Christ, he shall have license 
to trade in all things with Christians, but if he subsequently 
relapses into Judaism his person and property are forfeit to the 
king; Jews persisting in their faith shall.not consort with Chris- 
tians, but may trade with each other and pay taxes to the king. 
Their houses and slaves and lands and orchards and vineyards, 
which they may have bought from Christians, even though 
the purchase be of old date, are declared confiscated to the king, 
who may bestow them on whom he pleases. If any Jew trades 
in violation of this law he shall become aslave of the king, with 
all his property. Christians shall not trade with Jews; if a noble 
does so, he shall forfeit three pounds of gold to the king; on 
transactions of more than two pounds, the excess is forfeit to 
the king, together with three doblas; if the offender is a com- 
moner, he shall receive three hundred lashes.’ 

The date of this law is uncertain, but it presupposes a con- 
siderable anterior period of toleration, during which Jews had 
multiplied and had become possessed of landed wealth. To 
what extent it may have been enforced we have no means of 
knowing, but its observance must only have been temporary, 


for such glimpses as we get of the condition of the Jews up to | 


the fourteenth century are wholly incompatible with the fierce 
proscription of the Gothic laws. As the Spanish kingdoms 
organized themselves, the Fuero Juzgo for the most part was 
superseded by a crowd of local fueros, cartas-pueblas and cus- 
toms defining the franchises of each community, and we have 
seen in the preceding chapter how in these both Moor and Jew 


1 Fuero Juzgo, Lib. xu, Tit. ii, ley 18, 


7 


9 ie, 


Cuap. IIT} CONDITION OF SPANISH JEWS 85 


were recognized as sharing in the common rights of citizenship 
and how fully the freedom of trade between all classes was 
permitted. In 1251 the Fuero Juzgo was formally abrogated 
in Aragon by Jaime I, who forbade it to be cited in the courts 
—a measure which infers that it had practically become obsolete.* 
In Castile it lingered somewhat longer and traces of its exist- 
ence are to be found in some places until the end of the thir- 
teenth century.” These, however, are not to be construed as 
referring to the provisions respecting Jews, which had long been 
superseded. 
In fact, the Jews formed too large and important a portion 
of the population to be treated without consideration. The 
sovereigns, involved permanently in struggles with the Saracen 
and with mutinous nobles, found it necessary to utilize all the 
resources at their command, whether in money, intelligence, 
or military service. In the first two of these the Jews stood 
pre-eminent, nor were they remiss in the latter. On the disas- 
trous field of Zalaca, in 1086, forty thousand Jews are said to 
have followed the banner of Alfonso VI, and the slaughter they 
endured proved their devotion, while, at the defeat of Ucles in 
1108, they composed nearly the whole left wing of the Castilian 
host. In 1285 we hear of Jews and Moors aiding the Aragonese 
in their assaults on the retreating forces of Philippe le Hardi.* 
As regards money, the traffic and finance of Spain were largely 
in their hands, and they furnished, with the Moors, the readiest 
source from which to derive revenue. Every male who had 
married, or who had reached the age of 20, paid an annual poll 
tax of three gold maravedis; there were also a number of im- 
posts peculiar to them, and, in addition, they shared with the 
rest of the population in the complicated and ruinous system 
of taxation—the ordinary and extraordinary servicios, the pedi- 
das and ayudas, the sacos and pastos and the alcavalas. Besides 
this they assisted in supporting the municipalities or the lord- 
ships and prelacies under which they lived, with the tallas, the 
pastos, the ninths or elevenths of merchandise and the peajes 
and barcajes, the pontazgos and portazgos, or tolls of various kinds 


1 Marca Hispanica, p. 1439. 

2 Coleccion ‘de Privilegios, VI, 96 (Madrid, 1833).—Memorial hist. espafiol, I, 
38, 124: II, 71. 

8’ Amador de los Rios, I, 185-6, 189. 

# Contin. Gerardi de Fracheto, ann. 1285 (Dom Bouquet, XXI, 7). 


86 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


which were heavier on them than on Christians, and, moreover, 
the Church received from them the customary tithes, oblations, 
and first-fruits.* The revenues from the Jewish aljamas, or com- 
munities, were always regarded as among the surest resources 
of the crown. 

The shrewd intelligence and practical ability of the Jews, 
moreover, rendered their services in public affairs almost indis- 
pensable. It was in vain that the council of Rome, in 1078, 
renewed the old prohibitions to confide to them functions 
which would place them in command over Christians and equally 
in vain that, in 1081, Gregory VII addressed to Alfonso VI a 
vehement remonstrance on the subject, assuring him that to 
do so was to oppress the Church of God and exalt the synagogue 
of Satan, and that in seeking to please the enemies of Christ he 
was contemning Christ himself. In fact, the most glorious 
centuries of the Reconquest were those in which the Jews en- 
joyed the greatest power in the courts of kings, prelates and 
nobles, in Castile and Aragon. The treasuries of the kingdoms 
were virtually in their hands, and it was their skill in organizing 
the supplies that rendered practicable the enterprises of such 
monarchs as Alfonso VI and VII, Fernando III and Jaime I? 
To treat them as the Goths had done, or as the Church pre- 
scribed, had become a manifest impossibility. 

Under such circumstances it was natural that-their numbers 
should increase until they formed a notable portion of the popu- 
lation. Of this an estimate can be made from a repartimiento, 
or assessment of taxes, in 1284, which shows that in Castile 
they paid a poll tax of 2,561,855 gold maravedis, which at three 
maravedis per head infers a total of 853,951 married or adult 
males.* This large aggregate was thoroughly organized. Each 
aljama or community had its rabbis with a Rabb Mayor at its 


* Amador de los Rios, II, 67.—Benavides, Memorias de Fernando IV, II, 331. 

It indicates the independent position of Jews and Moors that they refused to 
pay tithes on lands acquired from Christians and their liability was enforced only 
after a vigorous and prolonged struggle——See Cap. 18, Extra, Lib. v, Tit. xix 
(Concil. Lateran. IV).—Innocent. PP. III, Regest. vu, 50; x, 61.—Concil 
Tarraconens. ann. 1291 (Aguirre, VI, 292).—Concil. Zamorens. ann. 1313, cap. x 
(Amador de los Rios, II, 564).—Memorial hist. espafiol, I, 33, 160..—Ferndéndez 
y Gonzdélez, pp. 348, 355, 380, 389.—Benavides, op. cit. II, 539, 541. 

? Concil. Roman. V, ann. 1078 (Migne’s Patrologia, CXLVIII, 799).—Gregor. 
PP. VII, Regest. rx, 2. 

3 Amador de los Rios, I, 28-9. * Ibidem, II, 58. 


Cuap. IIT] CONDITION OF SPANISH JEWS 87 


head. Then each district, comprising one or more Christian 
bishoprics, was presided over by a Rabb Mayor, and, above all, 
was the Gaon or Nassi, the prince, whose duty it was to see that 
the laws of the race, both civil and religious, were observed in 
their purity." As we have already seen, all questions between 
themselves were settled before their own judges under their 
own code, and even when a Jew was prosecuted criminally by 
the king, he was punishable in accordance with his own law.? 
So complete was the respect paid to this that their Sabbaths 
and other feasts were held inviolate; on these days they could 
_ not be summoned to court or be interfered with except by arrest 
for crime. Even polygamy was allowed to them.’ 

While their religion and laws were thus respected, they were 
required to.respect Christianity. They were not allowed to 
read or keep books contrary to their own law or to the Christian 
law. Proselytism from Christianity was punishable by death 
and confiscation, and any insults offered to God, the Virgin, or 
the saints, were visited with a fine of ten maravedis or a hun- 
dred lashes.* Yet, if we are to believe the indignant Lucas of 
Tuy, writing about 1230, these simple restraints were scarce 
enforced. The heretic Cathari of Leon, he tells us, were wont to 
circumcise themselves in order, under the guise of Jews, to 
propound heretical dogmas and dispute with Christians; what 
they dared not utter as heretics they could freely disseminate 
as Jews. The governors and judges of the cities listened approv- 
ingly to heresies put forth by Jews, who were their friends and 
familiars, and if any one, inflamed by pious zeal, angered these 
Jews, he was treated as if he had touched the apple of the eye 
of the ruler; they also taught other Jews to blaspheme Christ 
and thus the Catholic faith was perverted.° 

This represents a laxity of toleration impossible in any other 
land at the period, yet the Spanish Jews were not wholly shielded 
from inroads of foreign fanaticism. Before the crusading spirit 
had been organized for the conquest of the Holy Land, ardent 
knights sometimes came to wage war with the Spanish Saracens, 


1 Amador de los Rios, II, 74-5. 2 Leyes de Estilo, 89-90. 

3 El Fuero Real, Lib. rv, Tit. iv, ley 7—Partidas, vi, xxiv, 5. In 1322 Jaime 
II of Aragon forbids the molestation of Strogo Mercadell, a Jew, for taking a 
second wife.—Coleccion de Documentos de la Corona de Aragon, VI, 240. 

4 Fl Fuero Real, Lib. rv, Tit. 11, leyes 1, 2, 3. 

5 Luce Tudens. de altera Vita 1, 3. 


88 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Book I 


and their religious fervor was aggrieved by the freedom en- 
joyed by the Jews. About 1068, bands of these strangers treated 
them as they had been wont to do at home, slaying and plun- 
dering them without mercy. The Church of Spain was as yet 
uncontaminated by race hatred and the bishops interposed to 
save the victims. For this they were warmly praised by Alex- 
ander II, who denounced the crusaders as acting either from 
foolish ignorance or blind cupidity. Those whom they would 
slay, he said, were perhaps predestined by God to salvation; 
he cited Gregory I to the same effect and pointed out the differ- 
ence between Jews and Saracens, the latter of whom make war 
on Christians and could justly be assailed... Had the chair of 
St. Peter always been so worthily filled, infinite misery might 
have been averted and the history of Christendom been spared 
some of its most repulsive pages. 

When the crusading spirit extended to Spain, it sometimes 
aroused similar tendencies. In 1108, Archbishop Bernardo of 
Toledo took the cross and religious exaltation was ardent. The 
disastrous rout of Ucles came and was popularly ascribed to 
the Jews in the Castilian army, arousing indignation which 
manifested itself in a massacre at Toledo and in the burning of 
synagogues. Alfonso VI vainly endeavored to detect and pun- 
ish those responsible and his death, in 1109, was followed by 
similar outrages which remained unavenged.’ This was a spo- 
radic outburst which soon exhausted itself. A severer trial came 
from abroad, when, in 1210, the Legate Arnaud of Narbonne 
led his crusading hosts to the assistance of Alfonso IX. Al- 
though their zeal for the faith was exhausted by the capture 
of Calatrava and few of them remained to share in the crown- 
ing glories of Las Navas de Tolosa, their ardor was sufficient 
to prompt an onslaught on the unoffending Jews. The native 
nobles sought in vain to protect the victims, who were massa- 


cred without mercy, so that Abravanel declares this to have | 


been one of the bloodiest persecutions that they had suffered 
and that more Jews fled from Spain than Moses led out of Egypt.® 

This had no permanent influence on the condition of the 
Spanish Hebrews. During the long reigns of San Fernando III 


1 Alex. PP. II, Epist. 101 (Decreti Consid. xx, Q. viii, cap. 11). 

2 Amador de los Rios, I, 189-90. 

3 Roderici Toleti de Rebus Hispan. vi, 2, 6.—Malo, Histoire des Juifs, p. 267 
(Paris, 1826). 


Cuap. IIT] CONDITION OF SPANISH JEWS 89 


and Alfonso X of Castile and of Jaime I of Aragon, covering 
the greater part of the thirteenth century, the services which 
they rendered to the monarchs were repaid with increasing 
favor and protection. After Jaime had conquered Minorca 
he took, in 1247, all Jews settling there under the royal safe- 
guard and threatened a fine of a thousand gold pieces for wrong 
inflicted on any of them and, in 1250, he required that Jewish 
as well as Christian testimony must be furnished in all actions, 
civil or criminal, brought by Christians against Jews. So, when 
in 1306 Philippe le Bel expelled the Jews from France and those 
of Majorca feared the same fate, Jaime II reassured them by 

pledging the royal faith that they should remain forever in the 
land, with full security for person and property, a pledge con- 
firmed, in 1311, by his son and successor Sancho.’ In Castile, 
when San Fernando conquered Seville, in 1244, he gave to the 
Jews a large space in the city, and, in defiance of the canons, 
he allotted to them four Moorish mosques to be converted into 
synagogues, thus founding the aljama of Seville, destined to 
a history so deplorable. Alfonso X, during his whole reign, 
patronized Jewish men of learning, whom he employed in trans- 
lating works of value from Arabic and Hebrew; he built for 
them an observatory in Seville, where were made the records 
embodied in the Alfonsine Tables; he permitted those of Toledo 
to erect the magnificent synagogue now known as Santa Maria 
la Blanca, and Jews fondly relate that the Hebrew school, which 
he transferred from Cérdova to Toledo, numbered twelve thou- 
sand students.2, He was prompt to maintain their privileges, 
and, when the Jews of Burgos complained that in mixed suits 
the alcaldes would grant appeals to him when the Christian 
suitor was defeated, while refusing them to defeated Jews, he 
at once put an end to the discrimination, a decree which Sancho 
IV enforced with a penalty of a hundred maravedis when, in 
1295, the complaint was repeated.*? Yet Alfonso, in his systematic 
code known as the Partidas, which was not confirmed by the 
Cortes until 1348, allowed himself to be influenced by the teach- 
ings of the Church and the maxims of the imperial jurispru- 
dence. He accepted the doctrine of the canons that the Jew 


1 Villanueva, Viage Literario, XXII, 328, 329, 333. 

2 Amador de los Rios, I, 370, 447-51.—Lindo’s History of the Jews of Spain, 
Piriss: 

§ Leyes nuevas, Nim. xu, xur. Cf. Ley 7 (Alcubilla, Cédigos antiguos, I, 182). 


90 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boor I 


was merely suffered to live in captivity among Christians; he 
was forbidden to speak ill of the Christian faith, and any at- 
tempt at proselytism was punished with death and confisca- 
tion. The murder rite was alluded to as a rumor, but in case 
it was practised it was a capital offence and the culprits were 
to be tried before the king himself. Jews were ineligible to any 
office in which they could oppress Christians; they were for- 
bidden to have Christian servants, and the purchase of. a Chris- 
tian slave involved the death punishment. They were not to 
associate with Christians in eating, drinking, and bathing and 
the amour of a Jew with a Christian woman incurred death. 
While Jewish physicians might prescribe for Christian patients, 
the medicine must be compounded by a Christian, and the 
wearing of the hateful distinctive badge was ordered under 
penalty of ten gold maravedis or of ten lashes. At the same 
time Christians were strictly forbidden to commit any wrong 
on the person or property of Jews or to interfere in any way 
with their religious observances, and no coercion was to be used 
to induce them to baptism, for Christ wishes only willing service.* 

This was prophetic of evil days in the future and the reign 
of Alfonso proved to be the culminating point of Jewish pros- 
perity. The capital and commerce of the land were to a great 
extent in their hands; they managed its finances and collected 
its revenues. King, noble and prelate entrusted their affairs 
to Jews, whose influence consequently was felt everywhere. To 
precipitate them from this position to the servitude prescribed 
by the canons required a prolonged struggle and may be said 
to have taken its remote origin in an attempt at their conver- 
sion. In 1263 the Dominican Fray Pablo Christid, a converted 
Jew, challenged the greatest rabbi of the day, Moseh aben Naj- 
man, to a disputation which was presided over by Jaime I in 
his Barcelona palace. Each champion of course boasted of 
victory; the king dismissed Nachmanides not only with honor 
but with the handsome reward of three hundred pieces of gold, 
but he ordered certain Jewish books to be burnt and_blas- 
phemous passages in the Talmud to be expunged.? He further 


* Partidas, P. VII, Tit. xxiv. The provision punishing with death male Jews 
for intercourse with Christian women only expressed existing legislation, even 
when the woman was a prostitute.— Benavides, Memorias de Fernando IV, IT, 210. 

? Villanueva, Viage Literario, XIII, 332.—R. Nachmanidis Disputatio (Wagen- 
seilii Tela _Ignea Satanze).—Coleccion de Documentos de la C. de Aragon, VI, 165. 


Cuap. IIT] ATTEMPTS AT CONVERSION 91. 


issued a decree ordering all his faithful Jews to assemble and 
listen reverently to Fray Pablo whenever he desired to dispute 
with them, to furnish him with what books he desired, and to 
defray his expenses, which they could deduct from their tribute.* 
Two years later Fray Pablo challenged another prominent 
Hebrew, the Rabbi Ben-Astruch, chief of the synagogue of 
Gerona, who refused until he had the pledge of King Jaime, and 
of the great Dominican St. Ramon de Pefiafort, that he should 
not be held accountable for what he might utter in debate, but 
when, at the request of the Bishop of Gerona, Ben-Astruch 
wrote out his argument, the frailes Pablo and Ramon accused 
him of blasphemy, for it was manifestly impossible that a Jew 
could defend his strict monotheism and Messianic belief without 
a course of reasoning that would appear blasphemous to sus- 
ceptible theologians. The rabbi alleged the royal pledge; Jaime 
proposed that he should be banished for two years and his book 
be burnt, but this did not satisfy the Dominican frailes and 
he dismissed the matter, forbidding the prosecution of the rabbi 
except before himself. Appeal seems to have been made to 
Clement IV, who addressed King Jaime in wrathful mood, 
blaming him for the favor shown to Jews and ordering him to 
deprive them of office and to depress and trample on them; 
Ben-Astruch especially, he said, should be made an example 
without, however, mutilating or slaying him.? This explosion 
of papal indignation fell harmless, but the zeal of the Dominicans 
had been inflamed and in laboring for the conversion of the 
Jews they not unnaturally aroused antagonism toward those 
who refused to abandon their faith. So long before as 1242, 
Jaime had issued an edict, confirmed by Innocent IV in 1245, 
empowering the Mendicant friars to have free access to Juderias 
and Morerfas, to assemble the inhabitants and compel them to 
listen to sermons intended for their conversion. The Dominicans 
now availed themselves of this with such vigor and excited 
such hostility to the Jews that Jaime was obliged to step for- 
ward for their protection. He assured the aljamas that they 
were not accountable for what was contained in their books, 


1 Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Lib. III, fol. 546 (Archivo hist. nacional de 
Madrid). 

2 Coleccion de Documentos, VI, 167.—Villanueva, XIII, 336.—Ripoll Bullar 
Ord. Predic. I, 479. 3 Aguirre, VI, 369. 


92 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox lI 


unless it was to the dishonor of Christ, the Virgin and the saints, 
and all accusations must be submitted to him in person; 
their freedom of trade was not to be curtailed; meat slaugh- 
tered by them could be freely exposed for sale in the Juderfas, 
but not elsewhere; dealing in skins was not to be interfered 
with; their synagogues and cemeteries were to be subject to 
their exclusive control; their right to receive interest on loans 
was not to be impaired nor their power to collect debts; they 
were not to be compelled to listen to the friars outside of their 
Juderfas, because otherwise they were liable to insult and dis- 
honor, nor were the frailes when preaching in the synagogues 
to be accompanied by disorderly mobs, but at most by ten dis- 
creet Christians; finally, no novel limitations were to be imposed 
on them except by royal command after hearing them in oppo- 
sition.’ 

These provisions indicate the direction in which Dominican 
zeal was striving to curtail the privileges so long enjoyed by 
the Jews and the royal intention to protect them against local 
legislation, which had doubtless been attempted under this 
impulsion. They were not remiss in gratitude, for when, in 
1274, Jaime attended the council of Lyons, they contributed 
seventy-one thousand sueldos to enable him to appear with 
fitting magnificence.” The royal protection was speedily needed, 
for the tide of persecuting zeal was rising among the clergy 
and, shortly after his return from Lyons, on a Good Friday, 
the ecclesiastics of Gerona rang the bells, summoned the popu- 
lace and attacked the Juderfa, which was one of the largest 
and most flourishing in Catalonia. They would have succeeded 
in destroying it but for the interposition of Jaime, who chanced 
to be in the city and who defended the Jews with force of arms.’ 

After the death of Jaime, in 1276, the ecclesiastics seem to 
have thought that they could safely obey the commands of 
Clement IV, especially as Nicholas IV, in 1278, instructed the 
Dominican general to depute pious brethren everywhere to con- 
voke the Jews and labor for their conversion, with the signifi- 
cant addition that lists of those refusing baptism were to be 
made out and submitted to him, when he would determine what 
was to be done with them.* How the frailes interpreted the 


? Coleccion de Documentos, VI, 170. * Amador de los Rios, I, 438. 
’ Florez, Espafia Sagrada, XLIV, 298. 
* Septimi Decretal. Lib. v, Tit. i, cap. 2. 


Cuap. IIT] CONVERSION AND PERSECUTION 93 


papal utterances is indicated in a letter of Pedro III to Pedro 
Bishop of Gerona, in April of this same year, 1278, reciting that 
he had already appealed repeatedly to him to put an end to the 
assaults of the clergy on the Jews, and now he learns that they 
have again attacked the Juderia, stoning it from the tower of 
the cathedral and from their own houses and then assaulting it, 
laying waste the gardens and vineyards of the Jews and even 
destroying their graves and, when the royal herald stood up 
to forbid the work, drowning his voice with yells and derisions. 
Pedro accuses the bishop of stimulating the clergy to these 
outrages and orders him to put a stop to it and punish the 
offenders.* He was still more energetic when the French crusade 
under Philippe le Hardi was advancing to the siege of Gerona, 
in 1285, and his Moorish soldiers in the garrison undertook to 
sack the Call Juhich, or Juderia, when he threw himself among 
them, mace in hand, struck down a number and finished by 
hanging several of them.’ He offered no impediment, however, 
to the conversion of the Jews for, in 1279, he ordered his officials 
to compel them to listen to the Franciscans, who, in obedience 
to the commands of the pope, might wish to preach to them 
in their synagogues.* These intrusions of frailes into the Juderfas 
inevitably led to trouble, for there is significance in a letter of 
Jaime II, April 4, 1305, to his representative in Palma, alluding 
to recent scandals, for the future prevention of which he orders 
that no priest shall enter the Juderia to administer the sacra- 
ments without being accompanied by a secular official. This 
precaution was unavailing, for it doubtless was a continuance 
of such provocation that led to a disturbance, about 1315, afford- 
ing to King Jaime an excuse for confiscating the whole property 
of the aljama of Palma and then commuting the penalty to a 
fine of 95,000 libras. The source of these troubles is suggested 
by a royal order of 1327 to the Governor of Majorca, forbidding 
the baptism of Jewish children under seven years of age or the 
forcible baptism of Jews of any age.* 

During all this period there had been an Inquisition in Aragon 
which, of course, could not interfere with Jews as such, for they 
were beyond its jurisdiction, but which stood ready: to punish 
any more or less veritable efforts at propagandism or offences © 


1 Florez, op.' cit., XLIV, 297-99. 
? Bernard d’Esclot, Cronica del Rey en Pere, cap. clii. 
3 Coleccion de Documentos, VI, 194. 4 Villanueva, XXI, 165, 303. 


94 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox 1. 


of fautorship. The crown had no objection to using it as a 
means of extortion, while preventing it from exterminating 
or. crippling subjects so useful. A diploma of Jaime II, October 
14, 1311, recites that the inquisitor, Fray Juan Llotger, had 
learned that the aljamas of Barcelona, Tarragona, Monblanch 
and Vilafraneca had harbored and fed certain Jewish converts, 
who had relapsed to Judaism, as well as others who had come 
from foreign parts. He had given Fray Juan the necessary 
support, enabling him to verify the accusations on the spot 
and had received his report to that effect. Now, therefore, he 
issues a free and full pardon to the offending aljamas, with 
assurance that they shall not be prosecuted either civilly or 
criminally, for which grace, on October 10th, they had paid 
him ten thousand sueldos. In this case there seems to have 
been no regular trial by the Inquisition, the king having super- 
seded it by his action. In another more serious case he inter- 
vened after trial and sentence to commute the punishment. In 
1326 the aljama of Calatayud subjected itself to the Inquisition 
by not only receiving back a woman who had been baptized 
but by circumcising two Christians. Tried by the inquisitor 
and the Bishop of Tarazona it had been found guilty and it 
had been sentenced to a fine of twenty thousand sueldos and 
its members to confiscation, but King Jaime, by a cédula of 
February 6, 1326, released them from the confiscation and all 
other penalties on payment of the fine.’ 


Although Castile was slower than Aragon to receive impulses 
from abroad, in the early fourteenth century we begin to find 
traces of a similar movement of the Church against the Jews. 
In 1307 the aljama of Toledo complained to Fernando IV that 
the dean and chapter had obtained from Clement V bulls con- 
ferring on them jurisdiction over Jews, in virtue of which they 
were enforcing the canons against usury and stripping the 
Jewish community of its property. At this time there was no 
question in Spain, such as we shall see debated hereafter, of 
the royal prerogative to control obnoxious papal letters, and 
Fernando at once ordered the chapter to surrender the bulls; 
all action under them was pronounced void and restitution in 
double was threatened for all damage inflicted. The Jews, he 


1 Archivo gen. de la Corona de Aragon, Regist. 208, fol. 72; Regist. 229, fol. 
239. 


[Cuar. IIT CURTAILMENT OF PRIVILEGES 95 


said, were his Jews; they were not to be incapacitated from 
paying their taxes and the pope had no power to infringe on 
the rights of the crown. He instructed Ferran Nufiez de Pantoja 
to compel obedience and, after some offenders had been arrested, 
the frightened canons surrendered the bulls and abandoned 
their promising speculation, but the affair left behind it enmities 
which displayed themselves deplorably afterwards.’ 

In spite of the royal favor and protection, the legislation of 
the period commences to manifest a tendency to limit the privi- 
leges of the Jews, showing that popular sentiment was gradually 
turning against them. As early as 1286 Sancho IV agreed to 
deprive them of their special judges and, though the law was 
not generally enforced, it indicates the spirit that called for it 
and procured its repetition in the Cértes of Valladolid in 1307.’ 
Complaints were loud and numerous of the Jewish tax-gatherers, 
and the young Fernando IV was obliged repeatedly to promise 
that the revenues should not be farmed out nor their collection 
be entrusted to caballeros, ecclesiastics or Jews. The turbulence 
which attended his minority and short reign and the minority 
of his son, Alfonso XI, afforded a favorable opportunity for 
the manifestation of hostility and the royal power was too 
weak to prevent the curtailment in various directions of the 
Jewish privileges.* We have seen, in the preceding chapter, the 
temper in which the Spanish prelates returned from the Council 
of Vienne in 1312 and the proscriptive legislation enacted by 
them in the Council of Zamora in 1313 and its successors. Every- 
thing favored the development of this spirit of intolerance, 
and at the Cértes of Burgos, in 1315, the regents of the young 
Alfonso XI conceded that the Clementine canon, abrogating 
all laws that permitted usury, should be enforced, that all mixed 
actions, civil and criminal, should be tried by the royal judges, 
that the evidence of a Jew should not be received against a 
Christian while that of a Christian was good against a Jew, 
that Jews were not to assume Christian names, Christian nurses 
were not to suckle Jews and sumptuary laws were directed 
against the luxury of Jewish vestments.‘ 


~4 Amador de los Rios, II, 98-102. 

? Coleccion de Privilegios, VI, 129 (Madrid, 1833).—Benavides, Memorias de 
Fernando IV, II, 374. , 

3 Amador de los Rios, IJ, 90-4. 

* Cértes de los antiguos Reinos, I, 247.—Cap. 1, Clement. Lib. v, Tit. v. 


96 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


This may be said to mark the commencement of the long 
struggle which, in spite of their wonderful powers of resistance, 
was to end in the destruction of the Spanish Jews. Throughout. 
the varying phases of the conflict, the Church, in its efforts to 
arouse popular hatred, was powerfully aided by the odium 
which the Jews themselves excited through their ostentation, 
their usury and their functions as public officials. 

A strong race is not apt to be an amiable one. The Jews were 
proud of their ancient lineage and the purity of their descent 
from the kings and heroes of the Old Testament. A man who 
could trace his ancestry to David would look with infinite scorn 
on the hidalgos who boasted of the blood of Lain Calvo and, if 
the favor of the monarch rendered safe the expression of his 
feelings, his haughtiness was not apt to win friends among 
those who repaid his contempt with interest. The Oriental 
fondness for display was a grievous offence among the people. 
The wealth of the kingdom was, to a great extent, in Jewish 
hands, affording ample opportunity of contrast between their 
magnificence and the poverty of the Christian multitude, and 
the lavish extravagance with which they adorned themselves, 
their women and their retainers, was well fitted to excite envy 
more potent for evil because more wide-spread than enmity 
arising from individual wrongs.’ Shortly before the catastrophe, 
at the close of the fifteenth century, Affonso V of Portugal, who 
was well-affected towards them, asked the chief rabbi, Joseph- 
Ibn-Jachia, why he did not prevent his people from a display 
provocative of the assertion that their wealth was derived from 
robbery of the Christians, adding that he required no answer, 
for nothing save spoliation and massacre would cure them of it.” 

A more practical and far-reaching cause of enmity was the 
usury, through which a great portion of their wealth was ac- 
quired. The money-lender has everywhere been an unpopular 


character and, in the Middle Ages, he was especially so. When | 


the Church pronounced any interest or any advantage, direct 
or indirect, derived from loans to be a sin for which the sinner 
could not be admitted to penance without making restitution; 
when the justification of taking interest was regarded as a heresy 
to be punished as such by the Inquisition, a stigma was placed 
on the money-lender, his gains were rendered hazardous, and 


1 Lindo’s History of the Jews of Spain, p. 180. 
? Graetz, Geschichte der Juden, VIII, 327 (Ed. 1890). 


Cuap. IIT] CAUSES OF ENMITY 97 


his calling became one which an honorable Christian could not 
follow... Mercantile Italy early outgrew these dogmas which 
retarded so greatly all material development and it managed 
to reconcile, per fas et nefas, the canons with the practical neces- 
sities of business, but elsewhere throughout Europe, wherever 
Jews were allowed to exist, the lending of money or goods on 
interest inevitably fell, for the most part, into their hands, for 
they were governed by their own moral code and were not sub- 
ject to the Church. It exhausted all devices to coerce them 
through their rulers, but the object aimed at was too incom- 
patible with the necessities of advancing civilization to have any 
influence save the indefinite postponement of relief to the bor- 
rower.’ 

The unsavoriness of the calling, its risks and the scarcity of 
coin during the Middle Ages, conspired to render the current 
rates of interest exorbitantly oppressive. In Aragon the Jews 
were allowed to charge 20 per cent. per annum, in Castile 334,° 
and the constant repetition of these limitations and the pro- 
visions against all manner of ingenious devices, by fictitious 
sales and other frauds, to obtain an illegal increase, show how 
little the laws were respected in the grasping avarice with which 
the Jews speculated on the necessities of their customers.* In 
1326 the aljama of Cuenca, considering the legal rate of 333 
per cent. too low, refused absolutely to lend either money or 
wheat for the sowing. This caused great distress and the town- 
council entered into negotiations, resulting in an agreement 
by which the Jews were authorized to charge 40 per cent. In 
1385 the Cortes of Valladolid describe one cause of the necessity 
of submitting to whatever exactions the Jews saw fit to impose, 
when it says that the new lords, to whom Henry of Trastamara. 


1 Decreti P. 11, Caus. xiv, Q. 3, 4, 5, 6—Cap. 1, 2 2 Clement. Lib. v, Tit. v. 

2 Cap. 12, Extra, Lib. v, Tit. xix.—Concil. Lateran. IV, cap. 67.—Concil.. 
Lugdunens. II, ann. 1274, cap. 26.—Cap. 1 Clement. Lib. v, Tit. v—Concil. 
Pennafidelens. ann. 1302, cap. 9. 

3 Marca Hispanica, pp. 1415, 1426, 1431.—Constitutions de Cathalunya super-. 
fluas, Lib. 1, Tit. v, cap. 2.—Villanueva, Viage Literario, xx11, 301.—El Fuero 
Real, Lib. rv, Tit. ii, ley 6. 

4 Marca Hispanica, pp. 1433, 1436.—Coleccion de Documentos de la C. de 
Aragon, VI, 170.—Cértes de los antiguos Reinos, I, 127, 227, 281.—Amador de. 
los Rios, I, 393, 421, 587; II, 63, 69, 89, 121, 148.—Coleccion de Privilegios, VI, 
115-113; 

5 Amador de los Rios, II, 139. 


98 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


had granted towns and villages, were accustomed to imprison 
their vassals and starve and torture them to force payment of 
what they had not got, obliging them to get money from Jews 
to whom they gave whatever bonds were demanded.’ Mon- 
archs as well as peasants were subject to these impositions. In 
Navarre, a law of Felipe III, in 1330, limited the rate of interest 
to 20 per cent. and we find this paid by his grandson, Carlos ITI, 


in 1399, for a loan of 1000 florins but, in 1401, he paid at the ~ 


rate of 35 per cent. for a loan of 2000 florins, and in 1402 his 
queen, Dofia Leonor, borrowed 70 florins from her Jewish phy- 
sician Abraham at four florins a month, giving him silver plate 
as security; finding at the end of twenty-one months that the 
interest amounted to 84 florins, she begged a reduction and he 
contented himself with 30 florins.’ 

When money could be procured in no other way, when the 
burgher had to raise it to pay his taxes or the extortions of his 
lord and the husbandman had to procure seed-corn or starve, 
it is easy to see how all had to submit to the exactions of the 
money-lender; how, in spite of occasional plunder and scaling 
of debts, the Jews absorbed the floating capital of the com- 
munity and how recklessly they aided the frailes in concen- 
trating popular detestation on themselves. It was in vain that 
the Ordenamiento de Alcala, in 1348, prohibited usury to Moors 
and Jews as well as to Christians; it was an inevitable necessity 
and it continued to flourish.’ 

Equally effective in arousing antipathy were the functions 
of the Jews as holders of office and especially as almojarijes 
and recabdores—farmers of the revenues and collectors of taxes, 
which brought them into the closest and most exasperating 
relations with the people. In that age of impoverished treasuries 
and rude financial expedients, the customary mode of raising 
funds was by farming out the revenues to the highest bidder 
of specific sums; as the profit of the speculation depended on 
the amount to be wrung from the people, the subordinate col- 
lectors would be merciless in exaction and indefatigable in 
tracing out delinquents, exciting odium which extended to all 


1 Cértes de los antiguos Reinos, II, 234. 

? Yanguas y Miranda, Diccionario de Antigiiedades del Reino de Navarro, 
II, 93. 

* Ordenamiento de Alcald, Tit. xxr, ley 2. Cf. Ordenanzas Reales, Lib. vm, 
Tit. li, leyes 1-8. 


ee 


Cuap. III] CAUSES OF ENMITY 99 


the race. It was in vain that the Church repeatedly prohibited 
the employment of Jews in public office. Their ability and 
skill rendered them indispensable to monarchs, nobles, and 
prelates, and the complaints which arose against them on all 
sides were useless. Thus in the quarrel between the chapter 
of Toledo and the great Archbishop Rodrigo, in which the 
former appealed to Gregory IX, in 1236, one of the grievances 
alleged is that he appointed Jews to be provosts of the common 
table of the chapter, thus enabling them to defraud the canons; 
they even passed through the church and often entered the 
_chapter-house itself to the great scandal of all Christians; they 
collected the tithes and thirds and governed the vassals and 
possessions of the Church, greatly enriching themselves by plun- 
dering the patrimony of the Crucified, wherefore the pope was 
earnestly prayed to expel the Jews from these offices and 
compel them to make restitution.’ | 

When prelates such as Archbishop Rodrigo paid so little heed 
to the commands of the Church, it is not to be supposed that 
monarchs were more obedient or were disposed to forego the 
advantages derivable from the services of these accomplished 
financiers. How these men assisted their masters while enrich- 
ing themselves is exemplified by Don Gag de la Maleha, almojarije 
mayor to Alfonso X. When the king, in 1257, was raising an army 
to subdue Aben-Nothfot, King of Niebla, Don Cag undertook 
to defray all the expenses of the campaign in consideration of 
the assignment to him of certain taxes, some of which he was 
still enjoying in 1272.’ It was useless for the people who groaned 
under the exactions of these efficient officials to protest against 
their employment and to extort from the monarchs repeated 
promises no longer to employ them. The promises were never 
kept and, until the reign of Ferdinand and Isabella, this source 
of irritation continued. There was, it is true, one exception, 
the result of which was not conducive to a continuance of the 
experiment. In 1385 the Cértes of Valladolid obtained from 
Juan I a decree prohibiting the employment of Jews as tax- 
collectors, not only by the king but also by prelates and nobles, 
in consequence of which ecclesiastics obtained the collection of 
the royal revenues, but when they were called upon to settle 
they excommunicated the alcaldes who sought to compel pay- 


1 Padre Fidel Fita, Boletin, XI, 404. ? Amador de los Rios, I, 488. 


100 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


ment, leading to great confusion and bitterer complaints than 
ever. 

When the Jews thus gave grounds so ample for popular dis- 
like, it says much for the kindly feeling between the races that 
the efforts of the Church to excite a spirit of intolerance made 
progress so slow. These took form, as a comprehensive and 
systematic movement at the Council of Zamora, in 1313, and 
its successors, described in the preceding chapter, but in spite 
of them Alfonso XI continued to protect his Jewish subjects 
and the labors of the good fathers awoke no popular response. 
In Aragon a canon of the Council of Lérida, in 1825, forbidding 
Christians to be present at Jewish weddings and circumcisions, 
shows how fruitless as yet had been the effort to produce mutual 
alienation.’ 

Navarre had the earliest foretaste of the wrath to come. It 
was then under its French princes and, when Charles le Bel 
died, February 1, 1328, a zealous Franciscan, Fray Pedro Olligo- 
yen, apparently taking advantage of the interregnum, stirred, 
with his eloquent preaching, the people to rise against the Jews, 
and led them to pillage and slaughter. The storm burst on the 
aljama of Estella, March Ist, and rapidly spread throughout 
the kingdom. Neither age nor sex was spared and the num- 
ber of victims is variously estimated at from six to ten thousand. 
Queen Jeanne and her husband Philippe d’Evreux, who suc- 
ceeded to the throne, caused Olligoyen to be prosecuted, but 
the result is not known. They further speculated on the terrible 
massacre by imposing heavy fines on Estella and Viana and 
by seizing the property of the dead and fugitive Jews, and they 
also levied on the ruined aljamas the sum of fifteen thousand 
livres to defray their coronation expenses. Thus fatally weak- 
ened, the Jews of Navarre were unable to endure the misfor- 
tunes of the long and disastrous reign of Charles le Mauvais 
(1350-1387). A general emigration resulted, to arrest which 
Charles prohibited the purchase of landed property from Jews 
without special royal license. A list of taxables, in 1366, shows 
only 453 Jewish. families and 150 Moorish, not including Pam- 
peluna, where both races were taxable by the bishop. Although 
Charles and his son Charles le Noble (1387-1425) had Jews for 
almojarifes, it was in vain that they endeavored to allure the 


1 Cértes de los antiguos Reinos, II, 325.—Amador de los Rios, II, 320. 
2 Villanueva, XVII, 247. 


Cuap, IIT] THE BLACK DEATH 101 


fugitives back by privileges and exemptions. The aljamas con- 
tinued to dwindle until the revenue from them was inconsid- 
erable.’ 

In Castile and Aragon the Black Death caused massacres of 
Jews, as elsewhere throughout Europe, though not so wide-spread 
and terrible. In Catalonia the troubles commenced at Barcelona 
and spread to other places, in spite of the efforts of Pedro IV, 
both in prevention and punishment. They had little special 
religious significance, but were rather the result of the relaxation 
of social order in the fearful disorganization accompanying the 
pestilence and, after it had passed, the survivors, Christians, 
Jews and Mudéjares were for a moment knit more closely together 
in the bonds of a common humanity.? It is to the credit of 
Clement VI that he did what he could to arrest the fanaticism 
which, especially in Germany, offered to the Jews the alternative 
of death or baptism. Following, as he said, in the footsteps of 
Calixtus II, Eugenius III, Alexander III, Clement III, Ccelestin 
III, Innocent III, Gregory IX, Nicholas III, Honorius IV and 
Nicholas IV, he pointed out the absurdity of attributing the 
plague to the Jews. They had offered to submit to judicial exam- 
ination and sentence, besides which the pestilence raged in lands 
where there were no Jews. He therefore ordered all prelates to 
proclaim to the people assembled for worship that Jews were not 
to be beaten, wounded, or slain and that those who so treated 
them were subjected to the anathema of the Holy See. It wasa 
timely warning and worthy of one who spoke in the name of 
Christ, but it availed little to overcome the influence of the 
assiduous teaching of intolerance through so many centuries.* 

When Pedro the Cruel ascended the throne of Castile, in 1350, 
the Jews might reasonably look forward to a prosperous future, 
but his reign in reality proved the turning-point in their fortunes. 
He surrounded himself with Jews and confided to them the pro- 
tection of his person, while the rebellious faction, headed by 
Henry of Trastamara, his illegitimate brother, declared them- 
selves the enemies of the race and used Pedro’s favor for them 
as a political weapon. He was asserted to be a Jew, substituted 


1 Zurita, Afiales de Aragon, Lib. vi, cap. Ixxviii—Amador de los Rios, II, 
175-9, 284-5, 289-91. 

? Zurita, Lib. vu, cap. xxvi, xxxiii—Amador de los Rios, II, 260, 263, 
299-300. 

3 Raynald. Annal. ann. 1348, n. 83. 


102 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


for a girl born of Queen Maria whose husband, Alfonso XI, was 
said to have sworn that he would kill her if she did not give him 
a boy. It was also reported that he was no Christian but an 
adherent to the Law of Moses and that the government of Castile 
was wholly in the hands of Jews. It was not difficult therefore 
to arouse clerical hostility, as manifested by Urban V, who 
denounced him as a rebel to the Church, a fautor of Jews and 

Moors, a propagator of infidelity and a slayer of Christians.’ Of 
this the insurgents took full advantage and demonstrated their 
piety in the most energetic manner. When, in 1355, Henry of 
Trastamara and his brother, the Master of Santiago, entered 
Toledo to liberate Queen Blanche, who was confined in the 
aledzar, they sacked the smaller Juderfa and slew its twelve 
hundred inmates without sparing sex or age. They also besieged 
the principal Juderia, which was walled around and defended by 
Pedro’s followers until his arrival with reinforcements drove off 
the assailants.’ Five years later when, in 1360, Henry of Trasta- 
mara invaded Castile with the aid of Pedro IV of Aragon, on 
reaching Najara he ordered a massacre of the Jews and, as Ayala 
states that this was done to win popularity, it may be assumed 
that free license for pillage was granted. Apparently stimulated 
by this example the people of Miranda del Ebro, led by Pero 
Martinez, son of the precentor and by Pero Sdnchez de Bajiuelas, 
fell upon the Jews of their town, but King Pedro hastened thither 
and, as a deterrent example, boiled the one leader and roasted the 
other.’ When at length, in 1366, Henry led into Spain Bertrand 
de Guesclin and his hordes of Free Companions, the slaughter 
of the Jews was terrible. Multitudes fled and the French chron- 
icler deplores the number that sought refuge in Paris and preyed 
upon the people with their usuries. The aljama of Toledo pur- 
chased exemption with a million of maravedfis, raised in ten days, 
to pay off the mercenaries but, as the whole land lay for a time 
at the mercy of the reckless bands, slaughter and pillage were 
general. Finally the fratricide at Montiel, in 1369, deprived the 
Jews of their protector and left Henry undisputed master of Cas- 
tile.* What they had to expect from him was indicated by his 


1 Guill. Nangiac. Contin. ann. 1366.—Quarta Vita Urbani V (Muratori, 
S. R. L, III, m, 641). 

? Ayala, Crénica de Pedro I, afio vi, cap. vii. 

3 Tbidem, afio rx, cap. vii, viii. 

* Guill. Nangiac. Contin. ann. 1366.—Ayala, afio xvi, cap. viii. 


Cuap. IIT] INCREASING HOSTILITY 103 


levying, June 6, 13869, within three months of his brother’s 
murder, twenty thousand doblas on the Juderia of Toledo and 
authorizing the sale at auction, not only of the property of the 
inmates, but of their persons into slavery, or their imprisonment 
in chains with starvation or torture, until the amount should be 
raised. It was doubtless to earn popularity that about the same 
time he released all Christians and Moors from obligation to pay 
debts due to Jews, though he was subsequently’ persuaded to 
rescind this decree, which would have destroyed the ability of 
the Jews to pay their imposts.* 

Yet the Jews were indispensable in the conduct of affairs and 
Henry was obliged to employ them, like his predecessors. His 
contador mayor was Yugaf Pichon, a Jew of the highest considera- 
tion, who incurred the enmity of some of the leaders of his people. 
They accused him to the king, who demanded of him forty thou- 
sand doblas, which sum he paid within twenty days. With 
rancor unsatisfied, when Henry died, in 1379, and his son Juan I 
came to Burgos to be crowned, they obtained from him an order 
to his alguazil to put to death a mischief-making Jew whom they 
would designate. Armed with this they took the alguazil to 
Pichon’s house in the early morning, called him on some pretext 
from his bed and pointed him out as the designated person to the 
alguazil, who killed him on the spot. Juan was greatly angered; 
the alguazil was punished with the loss of a hand, the judge of 
the Juderia of Burgos was put to death and the Jews of Castile 
were deprived of jurisdiction over the lives of their fellows. 

We have already seen how the legislation of this period was 
rapidly taking a direction unfavorable to the Jews. The accession 
of the House of Trastamara had distinctly injured their position, 
the Church had freer scope to excite popular prejudice, while 
their retention as tax-collectors and their usurious practices 
afforded ample material for the stimulation of popular vindica- 
tiveness. The condition existed for a catastrophe, and the man 
to precipitate it was not lacking. Ferran Martinez, Archdeacon 
of Ecija and Official, or judicial representative of the Archbishop 
of Seville, Pedro Barroso, was a man of indomitable firmness and, 
though without much learning, was highly esteemed for his — 
unusual devoutness, his solid virtue and his eminent charity— 
which latter quality he evinced in founding and supporting the 


1 Amador de los Rios, II, 571-3.—Boletin, X XIX, 254. 
? Ayala, Cronica de Juan I, afio 1, cap. iii. 


104 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


hospital of Santa Marfa in Seville." Unfortunately he was a 
fanatic and the Jews were the object of his remorseless zeal, 
which his high official position gave him ample opportunity of 
gratifying. In his sermons he denounced them savagely and 
excited popular passion against them, keeping them in constant 
apprehension of an outbreak while, as ecclesiastical judge, he 
extended his jurisdiction illegally over them, to their frequent 
damage. In conjunction with other episcopal officials he issued 
letters to the magistrates of the towns ordering them to expel 
the Jews—letters which he sought to enforce by personal visita- 
tions. The aljama of Seville, the largest and richest in Castile, 
appealed to the king and, little as Henry of Trastamara loved 
the Jews, the threatened loss to his finances led him, in August, 
1378, to formally command Martinez to desist from his incendiary 
course, nor was this the first warning, as is shown by allusions to 
previous letters of the same import. To this Martinez paid no 
obedience and the aljama had recourse to Rome, where it pro- 
cured bulls for its protection, which Martinez disregarded as con- 
temptuously as he had the royal mandate. Complaint was again 
made to the throne and Juan I, in 1382, repeated his father’s 
commands to no effect, for another royal letter of 1383 accuses 
Martinez of saying in his sermons that he knew the king would 
regard as a service any assault or slaying of the Jews and that 
impunity might be relied upon. For this he was threatened with 
punishment that would make an example of him, but it did not 
silence him and, in 1388, the frightened aljama summoned him 
before the alcaldes and had the three royal letters read, summon- 
ing him to obey them. He replied with insults and, a week later, 
put in a formal answer in which he said that he was but obeying 
Christ and the laws and that, if he were to execute the laws, he 
would tear down the twenty-three synagogues in Seville as they 
had all been illegally erected. 

The dean and chapter became alarmed and appealed to the 
king, but Juan, in place of enforcing his neglected commands, 
replied that he would look into the matter; the zeal of the arch- 


1 Zufiiga, Annales de Sevilla, afio 1395, n. 2; afio 1404, n. 4. 

2 Amador de los Rios, II, 338-9, 579-89.—We have seen the prohibition, in 
the imperial jurisprudence, to erect new synagogues, and this was sedulously pre- 
served in the canon law.—Cap. 3, 8, Extra, v, vi. 

The twenty-three synagogues evidently refer to all in the diocese of Seville. 
At the time of the outbreak there were but three in the city. 


Cuap. IIT] THE MASSACRES OF 1391 105 


deacon was holy, but it must not be allowed to breed disturbance 
for, although the Jews were wicked, they were under the royal 
protection. This vacillation encouraged Martinez who labored 
still more strenuously to inflame the people, newly prejudiced 
against the Jews by the murder of Yucaf Pichon, who had been 
greatly beloved by all Seville. No one dared to interfere in their 
defence, but Martinez furnished an opportunity of silencing him 
by calling in question in his sermons the powers of: the pope in 
certain matters. He was summoned before an assembly of 
theologians and doctors, when he was as defiant of the episcopal 
authority as of the royal, rendering himself contumacious and 
suspect of heresy, wherefore on August 2, 1389, Archbishop 
Barroso suspended him both as to jurisdiction and preaching 
until his trial should be concluded.’ This gave the Jews a breath- 
ing-space, but Barroso died, July 7, 1390, followed, October 9, 
by Juan I. The chapter must have secretly sympathized with 
Martinez, for it elected him one of the provisors of the diocese 
sede vacante, thus clothing him with increased power, and we 
hear nothing more of the trial for heresy.® 

Juan had left as his successor Henry III, known as El Doliente, 
or the Invalid, a child of eleven, and quarrels threatening civil 
war at once arose over the question of the regency. Martinez 
now had nothing to fear and he lost no time in sending, Decem- 
ber 8th, to the clergy of the towns in the diocese, commands 
under pain of excommunication to tear down within three hours 
the synagogues of the enemies of God calling themselves Jews; 
the building materials were to be used for the repair of the 
churches; if resistance was offered it was to be suppressed by 
force and an interdict be laid on the town until the good work 
was accomplished. These orders were not universally obeyed 
but enough ruin was wrought to lead the frightened aljama of 
Seville to appeal to the regency, threatening to leave the land if 
they could not be protected from Martinez. The answer to this 
was prompt and decided. On December 22d a missive was 
addressed to the dean and chapter and was officially read to them, 
January 10, 1391. It held them responsible for his acts as they 


1 Zufliga, Annales de Sevilla, afio 1379, n. 3; afio 1388, n. 3. 

? Amador de los Rios, II, 592-4. 

§ Acta capitular del Cabildo de Sevilla, 10-15 de Enero de 1391 (Bibl. nacional, 
MSS., Dd, 108, fol. 78). 

* Amador de los Rios, II, 613. 


106 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


had elected him provisor and had not checked him; he must be 
at once removed from office, be forced to abstain from preaching 
and to rebuild the ruined synagogues, in default of which they 
must make good all damages and incur a fine of a thousand gold 
doblas each with other arbitrary punishments. Letters of similar 
import were addressed at the same time to Martinez himself. 
On January 15th the chapter again assembled and presented its 
official reply, which deprived Martinez of the provisorship, for- 
bade him to preach against the Jews and required him within a 
year to rebuild all synagogues destroyed by his orders. Then 
Martinez arose and protested that neither king nor chapter had 
jurisdiction over him and their sentences were null and void. 
The synagogues had been destroyed by order of Archbishop 
Barroso—two of them in his lifetime—and they had been built 
illegally without licence. His defiant answer concluded with a 
declaration that he repented of nothing that he had done. 
The result justified the dauntless reliance of Martinez on the 
popular passion which he had been stimulating for so many years. 
What answer the regency made to this denial of its jurisdiction 
the documents fail to inform us, but no effective steps were taken 
to restrain him. His preaching continued as violent as ever and 
the Seville mob grew more and more restless in the prospect of 
eratifying at once its zeal for the faith and its thirst for pillage. 
In March the aspect of affairs was more alarming than ever; the 
rabble were feeling their way, with outrages and insults, and the 
Juderia was in hourly danger of being sacked. Juan Alonso 
Guzman, Count of Niebla, the most powerful noble of Andalusia, 
was adelantado of the province and alcalde mayor of Seville and 
his kinsman, Alvar Pérez de Guzman, was alguazil mayor. On 
March 15th they seized some of the most turbulent of the crowd 
and proceeded to scourge two of them but, in place of awing the 
populace, this led to open sedition. The Guzmans were glad 
to escape with their lives and popular fury was directed against 
the Jews, résulting in considerable bloodshed and plunder, but 
at length the authorities, aided by the nobles, prevailed and order 
was apparently restored. By this time the agitation was spread- 
ing to Cérdova, Toledo, Burgos and other places. Everywhere 
fanaticism and greed were aroused and the Council of Regency 
vainly sent pressing commands to all the large cities, in the hope 
of averting the catastrophe. Martinez continued his inflamma- 


1 Acta capitular, ubi sup. 


~ Cuar. 111] THE MASSACRES OF 1891 107 


tory harangues and sought to turn to the advantage of religion 
the storm which he had aroused, by procuring a general forcible 
conversion of the Jews. The excitement increased and, on June 
9th the tempest broke in a general rising of the populace against 
the Juderia. Few of its inhabitants escaped; the number of slain 
was estimated at four thousand and those of the survivors who 
did not succeed in flying only saved their lives by accepting 
baptism. Of the three synagogues two were converted into 
churches for the Christians who settled in the Jewish quarter and 
the third sufficed for the miserable remnant of Israel which slowly 
gathered together after the storm had passed. 

From Seville the flame spread through the kingdoms of Castile 
from shore to shore. In the paralysis of public authority, during 
the summer and early autumn of 1391, one city after another 
followed the example; the Juderias were sacked, the Jews who 
would not submit to baptism were slain and fanaticism and 
cupidity held their orgies unchecked. The Moors escaped, for 
though many wished to include them in the slaughter, they were 
restrained by a wholesome fear of reprisals on the Christian cap- 
tives in Granada and Africa. The total number of victims was 
estimated at fifty thousand, but this is probably an exaggeration. 
For this wholesale butchery and its accompanying rapine there 
was complete immunity. In Castile there was no attempt made 
to punish the guilty. It is true that when Henry attained his 
majority, in 13895, and came to Seville, he caused Martinez to be 
arrested, but the penalty inflicted must have been trivial, for we 
are told that it did not affect the high estimation in which he was 
held and, on his death in 1404, he bequeathed valuable posses- 
sions to the Hospital of Santa Maria. The misfortunes of the 
aljama of Seville were rendered complete when, in January, 
1396, Henry bestowed on two of his favorites all the houses and 
lands of the Jews there and in May he followed this by forbidding 
that any of those concerned in the murder and pillage should be 
harassed with punishment or fines.’ 


1 Zuftiga, Annales de Sevilla, afio 1391, n. 1, 2, 3.—Ayala, Crénica de Enrique 
III, afio 1, cap. v, xx.—Barrantes, Ilustraciones de la Casa de Niebla, Lib. v, 
cap. xx.—Archivo de Sevilla, Seccion primera, Carpeta 11, n. 53. 

2 Ayala, Cronica de Enrique ITI, afio 1391, cap. xx.—Mariana, Hist. de Espafia, 
Lib. xvii, cap. xv.—Colmenares, Hist. de Segovia, cap. xxvii, 3 3.—Fidel Fita, 
Boletin, IX, 347.—Amador de los Rios, ITI, 360-3, 370-1, 382, 389, 391.—Zuhiga, 
Annales de Sevilla, afio 1391, n. 2; afio 1404, n. 4.—Archivo de Sevilla, Seccion 
primera, Carpeta cv, n. 1. 


108 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


In Aragon there was a king more ready to meet the crisis 
and the warning given at Seville was not neglected. Popular 
excitement was manifesting itself by assaults, robberies and 
murders in many places. In the city of Valencia, which had a 
large Jewish population, the authorities exerted themselves to 
repress these excesses and King Juan I ordered gallows to be 
erected in the streets, while a guard made nightly rounds along 
the walls of the Juderia. These precautions and the presence of 
the Infante Martin, who was recruiting for an expedition to 
Sicily, postponed the explosion, but it came at last. On Sunday, 
July 9, 1391, a crowd of boys, with crosses made of cane and a 
banner, marched to one of the gates of the Juderia, crying death 
or baptism for the Jews. By the time the gate was closed a por- 
tion of the boys were inside and those excluded shouted that the 
Jews were killing their comrades. Hard by there was a recruiting 
station with its group of idle vagabonds, who rushed to the 
Juderfa and the report spread through the city that the Jews 
were slaying Christians. The magistrates and the Infante has- 
tened to the gate, but the frightened Jews kept it closed and 
thus they were excluded, while the mob effected entrance from 
adjoining houses and by the old rampart below the bridge. The 
Juderfa was sacked and several hundred Jews were slain before 
the tumult could be suppressed. Demonstrations were also made 
on the Moreria, but troops were brought up and the mob was 
driven back. Some seventy or eighty arrests were made and 
the next day a searching investigation as to the vast amount of 
plunder led to the recovery of much of it.’ 

This added to the agitation which went on increasing. With 
August 4th came the feast of St. Dominic, when the Dominicans 
were everywhere conspicuous and active. The next day, as 
though in concert, the tempest burst in Toledo and Barcelona 
—in the former city with fearful massacre and conflagration. In 
the latter, despite the warning at Valencia, the authorities were 
unprepared when the mob arose and rushed into the call or Jewry, 
slaying without mercy. <A general demand for baptism went up 
and, when the civic forces arrived the slaughter was stopped, 
but the plunder continued. Some of the pillagers were arrested, 
and among them a few Castilians who, as safe victims, were con- 
demned to death the next day. Under pretext that this was 
unjust the mob broke into the gaol and liberated the prisoners. 


1 Amador de los Rios, II, 595-604. 


Cuap, III] THE MASSACRES OF 1391 109 


Then the ery arose to finish with the Jews, who had taken refuge 
in the Castillo Nuevo, which was subjected to a regular siege. 
Ringing the bells brought in crowds of peasants eager for dis- 
order and spoil. The Baylia was attacked and the registers of 
crown property destroyed, in the hope of evading taxes. On 
August 8th the Castillo Nuevo was entered and all Jews who 
would not accept baptism were put to the sword; the castle was 
sacked and the peasants departed laden with booty. The Juderia 
of Barcelona must have been small, for the number of slain was 
estimated at only three hundred. 
At Palma, the capital of Majorca, some three hundred Jews 
were put to death and the rest escaped only by submitting to 
baptism. The riots continued for some time and spread to 
attacks on the public buildings, until the gentlemen of the city 
armed themselves and, after a stubborn conflict, suppressed the 
disturbance. The chief aljamas of the kingdom were the appan- 
age of the queen consort and Queen Violante made good her losses 
by levying on the island a fine of 150,000 gold florins. The gen- 
tlemen of Palma remonstrated at the hardship of being punished 
after putting down the rioters; she reduced the fine to 120,000, 
swearing by the life of her unborn child that she would have 
justice. The fine was paid and soon afterwards she gave birth to 
a still-born infant. Thus in one place after another—Gerona, 
Lérida, Saragossa—the subterranean flame burst forth, fed by 
the infernal passions of fanaticism, greed and hatred. It seems 
incredible that, with the royal power resolved to protect its 
unhappy subjects, these outrages should have continued through- 
out the summer into autumn for, when the local authorities were 
determined to suppress these uprisings, as at Murviedro and Cas- 
tellon de la Plana, they were able to do so.° 

If Juan I was unable to prevent the massacres he at least was 
determined not to let them pass unpunished; many executions 
followed and some commutations for money payments were 
granted.* The aljama of Barcelona had been a source of much 
profit to the crown and he strove to re-establish it in new quarters, 


1 Amador de los Rios, II, 372-77, 398.—Bofarull y Broca, Hist. de Catalufia, 
V, 35. 

* Histéria general de Mallorca, II, 319 (Ed. 1841).—Loeb, Revue des Etudes 
Juives, 1887, p. 172.—Villanueva, XXI, 224. 

3 Revue des Etudes Juives, 1887, pp. 261-2. 

4 Amador de los Rios, II, 392-4.—Coleecion de Doe. de la Corona de Aragon, 
VIL. 430. 


110 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


offering various privileges and exemptions to attract new-comers. 
It was crushed however beyond resuscitation; but few of its 
members had escaped by hiding; nearly all had been slain or bap- 
tized and, great as were the franchises offered, the memory of the 
catastrophe seems to have outweighed them. In 1395 the new 
synagogue was converted into a church or monastery of Trini- 
tarian monks and the wealthy aljama of Barcelona, with its 
memories of so many centuries, ceased to exist." About the year 
1400, the city obtained a privilege which prohibited the forma- 
tion of a Juderfa or the residence of a Jew within its limits. 
Antipathy to Judaism, as we shall see, was rapidly increasing 
and when, in 1425, Alfonso VI confirmed this privilege he decreed 
that all Jews then in the city should depart within sixty days, 
under penalty of scourging, and thereafter a stay of fifteen days 
was the utmost limit allowed for temporary residence.’ 


If I have dwelt in what may seem disproportionate length on 
this guerra sacra contra los Judios, as Villanueva terms these 
massacres,* it is because they form a turning-point in Spanish 
history. In the relations between the races of the Peninsula the 
old order of things was closed and the new order, which was to 
prove so benumbing to material and intellectual development, 
was about to open. The immediate results were not long in 
becoming apparent. Not only was the prosperity of Castile and 
Aragon diminished by the shock to the commerce and industry 
so largely in Jewish hands, but the revenues of the crown, the 
churches and the nobles, based upon the taxation of the Jews, 
suffered enormously. Pious foundations were ruined and bishops 
had to appeal to the king for assistance to maintain the services: 
of their cathedrals. Of the Jews who had escaped, the major por- 
tion had only done so by submitting to baptism and these were 
no longer subject to the capitation tax and special imposts which 
had furnished the surest part of the income of cities, prelates, 
nobles and sovereigns.* Still the converted Jews, with their 
energy and intelligence remained, unfettered and unhampered in 
the pursuit of wealth and advancement, which was to benefit the 
community as well as themselves. It was reserved for a further 


1 Coleccion de Documentos, VI, 486, 488, 441, 454. 

? José Fiter y Ingles, Expulsion de los Judfos de Barcelona, pp. 8-14 (Barce- 
lona, 1876). This edict was renewed in 1479, 1480 and 1481 (Ibid. pp. 15-19). 

3 Viage literario, XVIII, 20. # Amador de los Rios, II, 382-5. 


Cuap. III] EFFECTS OF THE MASSACRES 111 


progress in the path now entered to deprive Spain of the services 
of her most industrious children. 

The most deplorable result of the massacres was that they 
rendered inevitable this further progress in the same direction. 
The Church had at last succeeded in opening the long-desired 
chasm between the races. It had looked on in silence while the 
Archdeacon of Ecija was bringing about the catastrophe and pope 
and prelate uttered no word to stay the long tragedy of murder 
and spoliation, which they regarded as an act of God to bring the 
stubborn Hebrew into the fold of Christ. Henceforth the old 
friendliness between Jew and Christian was, for the most part, a 
thing of the past. Fanaticism and intolerance were fairly aroused, 
to grow stronger with each generation as fresh wrongs and oppres- 
sion widened the abyss between believer and unbeliever and as 
new preachers of discord arose to teach the masses that kindness 
to the Jew was sin against God. Thus gradually the Spanish 
character changed until it was prepared to accept the Inquisition, 
which, by a necessary reaction, stimulated the development of 
bigotry until Spain became what we shall see it in the sixteenth 
and seventeenth centuries. 

That the Archdeacon of Ecija was in reality the remote founder 
of the Inquisition will become evident when we consider the for- 
tunes of the new class created by the massacres of 1391—that of 
the converted Jews, known as New Christians, Marranos or Con- 
versos. Conversion, as we have seen, was always favored by the 
laws and the convert was received with a heartiness of social 
equality which shows that as yet there was no antagonism of 
race but only of religion. The Jew who became a Christian was 
eligible to any position in Church or State or to any matrimonial 
alliance for which his abilities or character fitted him, but con- 
versions had hitherto been too rare and the converts, for the 
most part, too humble, for them to play any distinctive part in 
the social organization. While the massacres, doubtless, were 
largely owing to the attractions of disorder and pillage, the relig- 
ious element in them was indicated by the fact that everywhere 
the Jews were offered the alternative of baptism and that where 
willingness was shown to embrace Christianity, slaughter was at 
once suspended. The pressure was so fierce and overwhelming 
that whole communities were baptized, as we have seen at Bar- 
celona and Palma. At Valencia, an official report, made on July 
14th, five days after the massacre, states that all the Jews, except 


112 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


a few who were in hiding, had already been baptized; they came 
forward demanding baptism in such droves that, in all the 
churches, the holy chrism was exhausted and the priests knew 
not where to get more, but each morning the crismera would be 
found miraculously filled, so that the supply held out, nor was this 
by any means the only sign that the whole terrible affair was the 
mysterious work of Providence to effect so holy an end. The 
chiefs of the synagogues were included among the converts and 
we can believe the statement, current at the time, that in Valencia 
alone the conversions amounted to eleven thousand. Moreover 
it was not only in the scenes of massacre that this good work went 
on. So startling and relentless was the slaughter that panic 
destroyed the unyielding fortitude so often manifested by the 
Jews under trial. In many places they did not wait for a rising 
of the Christians but, at the first menace, or even in mere anticipa- 
tion of danger, they came eagerly forward and clamored to be 
admitted into the Church. In Aragon the total number of con- 
versions was reckoned at a hundred thousand and in Castile as 
certainly not less and this is probably no great exaggeration.’ 
Neophytes such as these could scarce be expected to prove stead- 
fast in their new faith. 

In this tempest of proselytism the central figure was San 
Vicente Ferrer, to the fervor of whose preaching posterity attrib- 
uted the popular excitement leading to the massacres.” This 
doubtless does him an injustice, but the fact that he was on hand 
in Valencia on the fatal 9th of July, may perhaps be an indication 
that the affair was prearranged. His eloquence was unrivalled; 
immense crowds assembled to drink in his words; no matter what 
was the native language of the listener, we are told that his 
Catalan was intelligible to Moor, Greek, German, Frenchman, 
Italian and Hungarian, while the virtue which flowed from him 
on these occasions healed the infirm and repeatedly restored the 
dead to life.* Such was the man who, during the prolonged 


* Amador de los Rios, II, 400-2, 445, 599-604.—Zurita, Afiales de Aragon, 
Lib. x, cap. xlvii. 

? Bernaldez, Hist. de los Reyes Catélicos, cap. xliiiim—The Jews likewise 
attributed their sufferings to this “Friar Vincent, from the city of Valencia, of 
the sect of Baal Dominic.”—Chronicles of Rabbi Joseph ben Joshua ben Meir, 
I, 265-7. 

3 Chron. Petri de Areniis, ann. 1408 (Denifle, Archiv fiir Litt. und Kirchen- 
geschichte, 1887, p. 647).—Coleccion de Doc. de la Corona de Aragon, I, 118.— 
Chron, Magist. Ord. Preedic. cap. xii (Martene, Ampliss. Collect. VII, 387).— 


Cuap. III] RISE OF THE CONVERSOS 113 


massacres and subsequently, while the terror which they excited 
continued to dominate the unfortunate race, traversed Spain 
from end to end, with restless and indefatigable zeal, preaching, 
baptizing and numbering his converts by the thousand—on a 
single day in Toledo he is said to have converted no less than four 
thousand. It is to be hoped that, in some cases at least, he may 
have restrained the murderous mob, if only by IDE its victims 
in the baptismal font. 

The Jews slowly recovered themselves from the feral shock; 
they emerged from their concealment and endeavored, with 
characteristic dauntless energy, to rebuild their shattered fortunes. 
Now, however, with diminished numbers and exhausted wealth, 
they had to face new enemies. Not only was Christian fanaticism 
inflamed and growing even stronger, but the wholesale baptisms 
had created the new class of Conversos, who were thenceforward 
to become the deadliest opponents of their former brethren. 
Many chiefs of the synogogue, learned rabbis and leaders of their 
people, had cowered before the storm and had embraced Chris- 
tianity. Whether their conversion was sincere or not, they had 
broken with the past and, with the keen intelligence of their race, 
they could see that a new career was open to them in which 
energy and capacity could gratify ambition, unfettered by the 
limitations surrounding them in Judaism. That they should 
hate, with an exceeding hatred, those who had proved true to the 
faith amid tribulation was inevitable. The renegade is apt to be 
bitterer against those whom he has abandoned than is the oppo- 
nent by birthright and, in such a case as this, consciousness of the 
contempt felt by the steadfast children of Israel for the weaklings 
and worldlings who had apostatized from the faith of their fathers 
gave a keener edge to enmity. From early times the hardest blows 
endured by Judaism had always been dealt by its apostate chil- 
dren, whose training had taught them the weakest points to 
assail and whose necessity of self-justification led them to attack 
these mercilessly. In 1085, Rabbi Samuel of Morocco came from 
Fez and was baptized at Toledo, when he wrote a tract’ to justify 


Salazar, Anamnesis Sanctt. Hispan. II, 513.—Tournon, Hommes IIlustres de 
VOrdre de S. Dominique, III, 37.—Mariana, Hist. de Espafia, VI, 423 (Ed. 1790). 
—Alban Butler, Vies des Saints, 5 Avril. 

1 Rabbi Sam. Marrochiani de Adventu Messie (Mag. Bib. Patrum, Ed. 1618, 
T. XI, p. 421).—-Jo. Chr. Wolfii Biblioth. Hebreee, I, 1099.—This tract was 
translated from Arabic to Latin in 1338 by the Dominican Alfonsus Bonihominis 
and was reprinted so recently as 1742, at Cassano by the Jesuits. 

8 


114 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


himself which had great currency throughout the middle ages. 
Rabbi Moses, one of the most learned Jews of his time, who was 
converted in 1106, wrote a dissertation to prove that the Jews 
had abandoned the laws of Moses while the Christians were 
fulfilling them.’ It was Nicholas de Rupella, a converted Jew, 
who started the long crusade against the Talmud by pointing 
out, in 1236, to Gregory IX the blasphemies which it contains 
against the Savior.? We have seen the troubles excited in 
Aragon by the disputatious Converso, Fray Pablo Christia, and 
he was followed by another Dominican convert, Ramon Martin, 
in his celebrated Pugio Fider. In this work, which remained 
an authority for centuries, he piled up endless quotations from 
Jewish writers to prove that the race was properly reduced to 
servitude and he stimulated the bitterness of hatred by arguing 
that Jews esteemed it meritorious to slay and cheat and despoil 
Christians.°* 

The most prominent among the new Conversos was Selemoh 
Ha-Levi, a rabbi who had heen the most intrepid defender of the 
faith and rights of his race. -On the eve of the massacres, which 
perhaps he foresaw, and influenced by an opportune vision of the 
Virgin, in 1390, he professed conversion, taking the name of Pablo 
de Santa Maria, and was followed by his two brothers and five 
sons, founding’a family of commanding influence. After a course 
in the University of Paris he entered the Church, rising to the 
see of Cartagena and then to that of Burgos, which he transmitted 
to his son Alfonso. At the Cortes of Toledo, in 1406, he so 
impressed Henry III that he was appointed tutor and governor 
of the Infante Juan II, Mayor of Castile and a member of the 
Royal Council. When, in the course of the same year, the king 
died he named Pablo among those who were to have the conduct 
and education of Juan during his minority; when the regent, 
Fernando of Antequera, left Castile to assume the crown of 
Aragon, he appointed Pablo to replace him, and the pope honored 
him with the position of legate a latere. In 1432, in his eighty- 
first year, he wrote his Scrutinium Scrvpturarum against his former 
co-religionists. It is more moderate than is customary in these 


1 Mag. Bibl. Patrum, T. XII, P. 1m, p. 358. For the zeal of the convert to 
induce his brethren to follow him, see Hermanni Opusc. de Conversione sua, 
cap. xvi (Migne’s Patrol. Lat. T. CLXX, p. 828). 

2 D’Argentré, Collect. Judic. de novis Erroribus, I, 1, 132. 

3 Pugionis Fidei P. 111, Dist. iii, cap. 21, 22. 


Cuap. IIT] OPPRESSION OF THE JEWS 115 


controversial writings and seems ny have been composed rather 
as a justification of his own course.’ 

Another prominent Converso was the Rabbi Jehoshua Ha- 
Lorqui, who took the name of Gerdénimo de Santafé and founded 
a family almost as powerful as the Santa Marias. He too showed 
his zeal in the book named Hebrwomastiz, in which he exaggerated 
the errors of the Jews in the manner best adapted to excite the 
execration of Christians. Another leading Converso family was 
that of the Caballerias, of which eight brothers were baptized 
and one of them, Bonafos, who called himself Micer Pedro de la 
Caballeria, wrote, in 1464, the Celo de Cristo contra los Judios in 
which he treated them with customary obloquy as the synagogue 
of Satan and argues that the hope of Christianity lies in their 
ruin.” In thus stimulating the spirit of persecuting fanaticism we 
shall see how these men sowed the wind and reaped the whirlwind. 

Meanwhile the position of the Jews grew constantly more 
deplorable. Decimated and impoverished, they were met by a 
steadily increasing temper of hatred and oppression. The mas- 
sacres of 1391 had been followed by a constant stream of emigra- 
tion to Granada and Portugal, which threatened to complete 
the depopulation of the aljamas and, with the view of arresting 
this, Henry III, in 1395, promised them the royal protection for 
the future. The worth of that promise was seen in 1406, when 
in Cérdova the remnant of the Juderia was again assailed by the 
mob, hundreds of Jews were slain and their houses were sacked 
and burnt. It is true that the king ordered the magistrates to 
punish the guilty and expressed his displeasure by a fine of 
twenty-four thousand doblas on the city, but he had, the year 
before, in the Cértes of 1405, assented to a series of laws depriving 
the Jews at once of property and of defence, by declaring void all 
bonds of Christians held by them, reducing to one-half all debts 
due to them and requiring a Christian witness and the debtor’s 
acknowledgement for the other half, annulling their privileges in 
the trial of mixed cases and requiring the hateful red circle to be 
worn except in travelling, when it could be laid aside in view of 
the murders which it invited.’ 


1 Scrutinii Scripturarum P. II. See Graetz (VIII, 79) for a full account of 
Selemoh Ha-Levi and of the controversies to which his apostasy gave rise. 

2 Amador de los Rios, II, 447; III, 108-9.—P. de la Caballerfa, Zelus Christi 
contra Judos (Venetiis, 1592).—Libro Verde de Aragon (Revista de Espafia, 
Tom. CV, p. 571). 

8 Amador de los Rios, II, 413-16, 419-22.—Cértes de los antiguos Reinos, IT, 544. 


116 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


This was cruel enough, yet it was but a foretaste of what was in 
store. In 1410, when the Queen-regent Dofia Catalina was in 
Segovia, there was revealed a sacrilegious attempt by some Jews 
to maltreat a consecrated host. The story was that the sacristan. 
of San Fagun had pledged it as security for a loan—the street in 
which the bargain was made acquiring in consequence the name 
of Calle del Mal Consejo. The Jews cast it repeatedly into a 
boiling caldron, when it persistently arose and remained sus- 
pended in the air, a miracle which so impressed some of them that 
they were converted and carried the form to the Dominican con- 
vent and related the facts. The wafer was piously administered 
in communion to a child who died in three days. Dofia Catalina 
instituted a vigorous investigation which implicated Don Mayr, 
one of the most prominent Jews in the kingdom, whose services 
as physician had prolonged the life of the late king. He was sub- 
jected to torture sufficient to elicit not only his participation in 
the sacrilege but also that he had poisoned his royal master. 
The convicts were drawn through the streets and quartered, as 
were also some others who in revenge had attempted to poison 
Juan de Tordesillas, the Bishop of Segovia. The Jewish syna- 
gogue was converted into the church of Corpus Christi and an 
annual procession still commemorates the event. San Vicente 
Ferrer turned it to good account, for we are told that in 1411 he 
almost destroyed the remnants of Judaism in the bishopric.’ 

The affair made an immense impression especially, it would 
seem, on San Vicente, convincing him of the advisability of forcing 
the Jews into the bosom of the Church by reducing them to despair. 
At Ayllon, in 1411, he represented to the regents the necessity 
of further repressive legislation and his eloquence was convincing.” 
The Ordenamiento de Dona Catalina, promulgated in 1412 and 
drawn up by Pablo de Santa Marfa as Chancellor of Castile, was 
the result. By this rigorous measure, Jews and Moors, under 
savage and ruinous penalties, were not only required to wear the 
distinguishing badges, but to dress in coarse stuffs and not to 
shave or to cut the hair round. They could not change their 
abodes and any nobleman or gentleman receiving them on his 


xxvili.—Garibay, Compendio historial de Espafia, Lib. xv, cap. 58.—Rodrigo, 
Historia verdadera de la Inquisicion, II, 44.—Padre Fidel Fita (Boletin, IX 
371). 

? Crénica de Juan II, afio v, cap. xxii. 


? 


Cuap. IIT] OPPRESSION OF THE JEWS 1 hy 


lands was heavily fined and obliged to return them whence they 
came, while expatriation was forbidden under pain of slavery. 
Not only were the higher employments of farming the revenues, 
tax-collecting, and practising as physicians and surgeons for- 
bidden, but any position in the households of the great and 
numerous trades, such as those of apothecaries, grocers, farriers, 
blacksmiths, peddlers, carpenters, tailors, barbers, and butchers. 
They could not carry arms or hire Christians to work in their 
houses or on their lands. That they should be forbidden to eat, 
drink or bathe with Christians, or be with them in feasts and wed- 
dings, or serve as god-parents was a matter of course under the 
canon law, but now even private conversation between the races 
was prohibited, nor could they sell provisions to Christians or 
keep a shop or ordinary for them. It is perhaps significant that 
nothing was said about usury. Money-lending was almost the 
only occupation remaining open, while the events of the last 
twenty years had left little capital wherewith to carry it on and 
the laws of 1405 had destroyed all sense of security in making 
loans. They were moreover deprived of the guarantees so long 
enjoyed and were subjected to the exclusive jurisdiction, civil 
and criminal, of the Christians." They were thus debarred from 
the use of their skill and experience in the higher pursuits, profes- 
sional and industrial, and were condemned to the lowest and rudest 
forms of labor; in fine, a wall was built around them from which 
their only escape was through the baptismal font. Fernando of 
Antequera carried the law in all its essentials to Aragon and King 
Duarte adopted it in Portugal, so that it ruled the whole Penin- 
sula except the little kingdom of Navarre where Judaism was 
already almost extinct. It is significant that Fernando, in pro- 
mulgating it in Majorca, alleged in justification the complaints 
of the inquisitors as to the social intercourse between Jews and 
Christians.” 

While San Vicente and Pablo de Santa Maria were thus engaged 
in reducing to despair the Jews of Castile, the other great Con- 
verso, Gerédnimo de Santafé, was laboring in a more legitimate 
way for their conversion in Aragon. He had been appointed 
physician to the Avignonese pope, Benedict XIII, who had been 
obliged to cross the Pyrenees, and who, on November 25, 1412, 


1 Fortalicium Fidei, fol. clxxvi-viii—Amador de los Rios, II, 496-502.— 
Fernandez y Gonzdlez, Estado de los Mudéjares, pp. 400-5. 
? Amador de los Rios, II, 503, 515.—Villanueva, XXII, 258. 


118 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


summoned the aljamas of Aragon to send, in the following Jan- 
uary, their most learned rabbis to San Mateo, near Tortosa, for a 
disputation with Gerénimo on the proposition that the Messiah 
had come. Fourteen rabbis, selected from the synagogues of all 
Spain, with Vidal ben Veniste at their head, accepted the chal- 
lenge. The debate opened, February 7, 1414, under the presi- 
dency of Benedict himself, who warned them that the truth of 
Christianity was not to be discussed but only sixteen propositions 
put forward by Gerénimo, thus placing them wholly on the defen- 
sive. Despite this disadvantage they held their ground tenaci- 
ously during seventy-nine sessions, prolonged through a term of 
twenty-one months. Gerdénimo covered himself with ‘glory by his 
unrivalled dialectical subtilty and exhaustless stores of learning 
and his triumph was shown by his producing a division between 
his opponents." 

During this colloquy, in the summer of 1413, some two hundred 
Jews of the synagogues of Saragossa, Calatayud and Alcafiiz 
professed conversion. In 1414 there was a still more abundant 
harvest. A hundred and twenty families of Calatayud, Daroca, 
Fraga and Barbastro presented themselves for baptism and these 
were followed by the whole aljamas of Alcafiiz, Caspe, Maella, 
Lérida, Tamarit and Alcolea, amounting to about thirty-five 
hundred souls. The repressive legislation was accomplishing its 
object and hopes were entertained that, with the aid of the 
inspired teaching of San Vicente, Judaism would become extinct 
throughout Spain.” To stimulate the movement by an increase 
of severity towards the recalcitrant, Benedict issued his consti- 
tution Htsz doctoribus gentium, in which he virtually embodied the 
Ordenamiento de Dofia Catalina, thus giving to its system of ter- 
rible repression the sanction of Church as well as of State. He 
further forbade the possession of the Talmud or of any books 
contrary to the Christian faith, ordering the bishops and inquis- 
itors to make semi-annual inquests of the aljamas and to proceed 
against all found in possession of such books. No Jew should even 


* The Spanish historians claim that all the rabbis, except Joseph Albo and 
Vidal Ferrer, acknowledged the truth of Christianity and abjured the errors of 
Judaism (Amador de los Rios, II, 438-42; Zurita, Afiales de Aragon, Lib. xn, 
cap. xlv), but Graetz (Geschichte der Juden, VIII, 120-1) states with greater 
probability, that the only concession made by the twelve was that the Haggadah 
passages of the Talmud are of no authority and even from this Ferrer and Albo 
dissented. 

? Zurita, Afiales, Lib. xm, cap. xlv. 


Cuap. IIT] OPPRESSION OF THE JEWS 119. 


bind a book in which the name of Christ or the Virgin appeared. 
Princes were exhorted to grant them no favors or privileges and 
the faithful at large were commanded not to rent or sell houses 
to them or to hold companionship or conversation with them. 
Moreover they were prohibited to exercise usury and thrice a year 
they were to be preached to and warned to abandon their errors. 
The bishops in general were ordered to see to the strict enforce- 
ment of all these provisions and the execution of the bull was 
specially confided to Gonzalo, Bishop of Sigiienza, son of the great 
Converso, Pablo de Santa Maria. As the utterance of the Anti- 
pope Benedict, this searching and cruel legislation, designed to 
reduce the Jews to the lowest depths of poverty and despair, was 
current only in the lands of his obedience, but when his triumph- 
ant rival, Martin V, confirmed the charge confided to the Bishop 
of Siguenza he accepted and ratified the act of Benedict... Nay 
more; in 1434, Alfonso de Santa Maria, Bishop of Burgos, another 
son of the Converso Pablo, when a delegate to the council of Basle, 
procured the passage of a decree in the same sense.” The quarrel 
of the council with the papacy, it is true, deprived its utterance 
of cecumenic authority, but this deficiency was supplied when, 
in 1442, Eugenius IV issued a bull which was virtually a repeti- 
tion of the law of Dofia Catalina and of the constitution of Bene- 
dict XIII, while this was followed, in 1447, by an even more 
rigorous one of Nicholas V.* Thus all factions of the Church, 
however much they might wrangle on other points, cheerfully 
united in rendering the life of the Jew as miserable as possible and 
in forbidding princes to show him favor. This was symbolized 
when, in 1418, the legate of Martin V was solemnly received in 
Gerona and the populace, with inerring instinct, celebrated the 
closing of the great Schism and the reunion of the Church by 
playfully sacking the Juderfa, though the royal officials, blind to 
the piety of the demonstration, severely punished the perpe- 
trators.* 


The immediate effect of this policy corresponded to the inten- 
tions of its authors, though its ultimate results can scarce have 
been foreseen. The Jews were humiliated and impoverished. 


1 Amador de los Rios, II, 627-53; III, 38. 

2 Concil. Basiliens. Sess. xix, cap v, vi (Harduin. VIII, 1190-3). 

3 Raynald. Annal. ann. 1442, n. 15.—Wadding, Annal. Minor. ann. 1447, n. 10. 
* Villanueva, XIV, 30. 


120 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boor I 


Despite their losses by massacre and conversion, they still formed 
an important portion of the population, with training and apti- 
tudes to render service to the State but, debarred from the pursuits 
for which they had been fitted, they were crippled both for their 
own recuperation and for the benefit of the public. The economic 
effect was intensified by the inclusion of the Mudéjares in the 
repressive legislation; commerce and manufactures decayed and 
many products which Spain had hitherto exported she was now 
obliged to import at advanced prices.* 

On the other hand the Conversos saw opened to them a career 
fitted to stimulate and satisfy ambition. Confident in their 
powers, with intellectual training superior to that of the Chris- 
tians, they aspired to the highest places in the courts, in the 
universities, in the Church and in the State. Wealth and power 
rendered them eligible suitors and they entered into matri- 
monial alliances with the noblest houses in the land, many of 
which had been impoverished by the shrinkage of the revenues 
derived from their Jewish subjects. Alfonso de Santa Marfa, in 
procuring the decree of Basle, was careful to insert in it a recom- 
mendation of marriage between converts and Christians as the 
surest means of preserving the purity of the faith, and the advice 
was extensively followed. Thus the time soon came when there 
were few of the ancient nobility of Spain who were not connected, 
closely or remotely, with the Jew. We hear of marriages with 
Lunas, Mendozas, Villahermosas and others of the proudest 
houses.2. As early as 1449 a petition to Lope de Barrientos, 
Bishop of Cuenca, by the Conversos of Toledo, enumerates all the 
noblest families of Spain as being of Jewish blood and among others 
the Henriquez, from whom the future Ferdinand the Catholic 
descended, through his mother Juana Henriquez.* It was the same 
in the Church, where we have seen the rank attained by the Santa 
Marias. Juan de Torquemada, Cardinal of San Sisto, was of 
Jewish descent and so, of course, was his nephew, the first inquis- 
itor-general,* as was likewise Diego Deza, the second inquisitor- 
general, as well as Hernando de Talavera, Archbishop of Granada. 
It would be easy to multiply examples, for in every career the 
vigor and keenness of the Jews made them conspicuous and, in 


1 Amador de los Rios, III, 12. 

2 Libro Verde de Aragon (Revista de Espafia, CVI, 257, 269). 

3 Caballero, Noticias del Doctor Alonso Diaz de Montalvo, p. 251. 
* Pulgar, Claros Varones, Tit. xvi1t. 


Cuap. IIT] VICISSITUDES 121 


embracing Christianity, they seemed to be opening a new avenue 
for the development of the race in which it would become domi- 
nant over the Old Christians; in fact, an Italian nearly contem- 
porary describes them as virtually ruling Spain, while secretly 
perverting the faith by their covert adherance to Judaism.’ This 
triumph however was short-lived. Their success showed that 
thus far there had been no antagonism of race but only of religion. 
This speedily changed; the hatred and contempt which, as 
apostates, they lavished on the faithful sons of Israel reacted on 
themselves. It was impossible to stimulate popular abhorrence 
of the Jew without at the same time stimulating the envy and 
jealousy excited by the ostentation and arrogance of the New 
Christians. What was the use of humiliating and exterminating 
the Jew if these upstarts were not only to take his place in 
grinding the people as tax-gatherers but were to bear rule in 
court and camp and church? 

Meanwhile the remnant of the Jews were slowly but indomi- 
tably recovering their position. It was much easier to enact the 
Ordenamiento de Dota Catalina than to enforce it and, like much 
previous legislation, it was growing obsolete in many respects. 
In the early days of Juan II, Abrahem Benaviste was virtually 
finance minister and, when the Infante Henry of Aragon seized the 
king at Tordesillas and carried him off, he justified the act by 
saying that it was because the government was in the hands of 
Abrahem.? In fact there are indications of a reaction in which 
the Jews were used as a counterpoise to the menacing growth of 
Converso influence. When, in 1442, the cruel bull of Eugenius 
IV was received, although it scarce contained more than the laws 
of 1412 and the bull of Benedict XIII, Alvaro de Luna, the all- 
powerful favorite, not only refused to obey it but proceeded to 
give legal sanction to the neglect into which those statutes had 
fallen. He induced his master to issue the Pragmatica of Arévalo, 
April 6, 1443, condemning the refusal of many persons to buy or 
sell with Jews and Moors or to labor for them in the fields, under 
color of a bull of Eugenius IV, published at Toledo during his 
absence. Punishment is threatened for these audacities, for the 
bull and the laws provide that Jews and Moors and Christians 
shall dwell together in harmony and no one is to injure or slay 
them. It was not intended to prevent Jews and Moors and 


1 Tristan. Caraccioli Epist. de Inquisit. (Muratori, S. R. I., XXII, 97). 
2 Crénica de Juan II, afio xIv, cap. ii. 


122 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


Christians from dealing together, nor that the former should not 
follow industries base and servile, such as all manner of mechan- 
ical trades, and Christians can serve them for proper wages and 
guard their flocks and labor for them in the fields, and they can 
prescribe for Christians if the medicines are compounded by 
Christians.’ 

Thus a revulsion had taken place in favor of the proscribed race 
which threatened toundo the work of Vicente Ferrer and the Con- 
versos. It was in vain that, in 1451, Nicholas V issued another 
bull repeating and confirming that of Eugenius IV.’ It received 
no attention and, under the protection of Alvaro de Luna, the 
Jews made good use of the breathing-space to reconstruct their 
shattered industries and to demonstrate their utility to the State. 
The conspiracy which sent Alvaro to the block, in 1453, was a 
severe blow but, on the accession of Henry IV, in 1454, they 
secured the good-will of his favorites and even procured the 
restoration of some old privileges, the most important of which 
was the permission to have their own judges. One element in this 
was the influence enjoyed by the royal physician Jacob Aben- 
Nufiez on whom was conferred the office of Rabb Mayor.* In 
the virtual anarchy of the period, however, when every noble 
was a law unto himself, it is impossible to say how far royal 
decrees were effective, or to postulate any general conditions. In 
1458, the Constable Velasco orders his vassals of the town of 
Haro to observe the law forbidding Christians to labor for Jews 
and Moors, but he makes the wise exception that they may do so 
when they can find no other work wherewith to support them- 
selves. Even under these conditions the superior energy of the 
non-Christian races was rapidly acquiring for them the most pro- 
ductive lands, if we may trust a decree of the town of Haro, in 
1453, forbidding Christians to sell their estates to Moors and Jews, 
for if this were not stopped the Christians would have no ground 
to cultivate, as the Moors already held all the best of the irrigated 
lands.* . 

The nobles had seen the disadvantage of the sternly oppressive 
laws and disregarded them to their own great benefit, thus raising 
the envy of the districts obliged to observe them, for the Cértes of 
1462 petitioned Henry to restore liberty of trade between Chris- 
tian and Jew, alleging the inconvenience caused by the restriction 


1 Amador de los Rios, III, 583-9. ? Raynald. Annal, ann. 1451, n. 5. 
3 Amador de los Rios, ITI, 115-16. * Boletin, XXVI, 468-72. 


Cuap. IIT] VICISSITUDES 123 


and the depopulation of the crown lands for, as trade was per- 
mitted in the lands of the nobles, the Jews were concentrating 
there. When further the Cértes asked that Jews should be per- 
mitted to return with their property and trades to the cities in the 
royal domains from which they had been expelled, it indicates that 
popular aversion was becoming directed to the Conversos rather 
than to the Jews.’ It may be questioned whether it was to pre- 
serve the advantage here indicated or to gain popular favor, that 
the revolted nobles, in 1460, demanded of Henry that he should 
banish from his kingdoms all Moors and Jews who contaminated 
religion and corrupted morals and that, when they deposed him, 
in 1465, at Avila and elevated to the throne the child Alfonso, the 
Concordia Compromisoria which they dictated, annulled the 
Pragmatica of Arévalo and restored to vigor the laws of 1412 
and the bull of Benedict XIII. This frightened the Jews, who © 
offered to Henry an immense sum for Gibraltar, where they pro- 
posed to establish a city of refuge, but he refused.’ 

The fright was superfluous for, in the turbulence of the time, 
the repressive legislation was speedily becoming obsolete. When 
the reforming Council of Aranda, in 1473, made but a single refer- 
ence to Jews and Moors and this was merely to forbid them to 
pursue their industries publicly on Sundays and feast days, with 
a threat against the judges who, through bribery, permitted this 
desecration, it is fair to conclude that the law of 1412, if observed 
at all, was enforced only in scattered localities. That the restric- 
tions on commercial activity were obsolete is manifest from a 
complaint, in 1475, to the sovereigns, from the Jews of Medina 
del Pomar, setting forth that they had been accustomed to pur- 
chase in Bilbao, from foreign traders, cloths and other merchan- 
dise which they carried through the kingdom for sale, until 
recently the port had restricted all dealings with foreigners to the 
resident Jews, whereupon Ferdinand and Isabella ordered these 
regulations rescinded unless the authorities could show good 
reasons within fifteen days.* 

With the settlement of affairs under Ferdinand and Isabella 
the position of the Jews grew distinctly worse. Although Don 


1 Cértes de los antiguos Reinos, III, 717. 

2 Colmenares, Hist. de Segovia, cap. xxx1, 3 9—Amador de los Rios, III, 164— 
7.—lerndndez y Gonzdlez, p. 213. 

8 Concil. Arandens. ann. 1473, cap. vii (Aguirre, V, 345). 

* Coleccion de Cédulas, I, 45. 


124 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


Abraham Senior, one of Isabella’s most trusted counsellors, was 
a Jew, her piety led her to revive and carry out the repressive 
policy of San Vicente Ferrer and, in codifying the royal edicts in 
the Ordenanzas Reales, confirmed by the Cortes of Toledo in 1480, 
all the savage legislation of 1412 was re-enacted, except that 
relating to mechanical trades, and the vigor of the government 
gave assurance that the laws would be enforced, as we have seen 
in the matter of the separation of the Juderias.. Ferdinand’s 
assent to this shows that he adopted the policy and, in his own 
dominions, by an edict of March 6, 1482, he withdrew all licenses 
to Jews to lay aside the dangerous badge when travelling, and he 
further prohibited the issuing of such licenses under penalty of a 
thousand florins. Another edict of December 15, 1484, recites 
that at Cella, a village near Teruel, some Jews had recently taken 
temporary residence; as there is no Juderfa, in order to avoid 
danger to souls, he orders them driven out and that none be 
allowed to remain more than twenty-four hours under pain of a 
hundred florins and a hundréd lashes.’ 

This recrudescence of oppression probably had an influence on 
the people, for there came a revulsion of feeling adverse to the 
proscribed race, inflamed by the ceaseless labors of the frailes 
whose denunciatory eloquence knew no cessation. Under these 
circumstances the Jews and Moors seem to have had recourse to 
the Roman curia, always ready to speculate by selling privileges, 
whether it had power to grant them or not, and then to withdraw 
them for a consideration. We shall have ample occasion to see 
hereafter prolonged transactions of the kind arising from the 
operation of the Inquisition; those with the Jews at this time 
seem to have been closed by a motu proprio of May 31, 1484, 
doubtless procured from Sixtus IV by pressure from the sover- 
elgns, in which the pope expresses his displeasure at learning that 
in Spain, especially in Andalusia, Christians, Moors and Jews 
dwell together; that there is no distinction of vestments, that the 
Christians act as servants and nurses, the Moors and Jews as phy- 
sicians, apothecaries, farmers of ecclesiastical revenues etc., pre- 
tending that they hold papal privileges to that effect. Any such 
privileges he withdraws and he orders all officials, secular and 
ecclesiastical, to enforce strictly the canonical decrees respecting 


1 Ordenanzas Reales, vit, iii, 1-41. 
? Archivo general de la C. de Aragon, Regist. 3684, fol. 10, 33. 


Cuap. III] DECLINE OF JUDAISM 125 


the proscribed races." Under these impulses the municipalities, 
which, in 1462, had petitioned to have the proscriptive laws 
repealed now enforced them with renewed vigor and even exceeded 
them, as at Balmaseda, where the Jews were ordered to depart. 
They appealed to the throne, representing that they lived in daily 
fear for life and property and begged the royal protection, 
which was duly granted? 

Subjected to these perpetual and harassing eaceernlee the Jews 
had greatly declined both in numbers and wealth. An ASSESS- 
ment of the poll-tax, made in 1474, shows that in the dominions 
of Castile there were only about twelve thousand families left, 
or from fifty to sixty thousand souls, although there were still 
two hundred and sixteen separate aljamas. Their weakness and 
poverty are indicated by the fact that such communities as those 
of Seville, Toledo, Cordova, Burgos, etc., paid much less than 
inconspicuous places prior to 1391. The aljama of Ciudad-Real, 
which had paid, in 1290, a tax of 26,486 maravedis, had disap- 
peared; the only one left in La Mancha was Almagro, assessed at 
800 maravedis.* The work of Martinez and San Vicente Ferrer 
was accomplishing itself. Popular abhorrence had grown, while 
the importance of the Jews as a source of public revenue had 
fatally diminished. The end was evidently approaching, but a 
consideration of its horrors must be postponed while we glance 
at the condition of the renegades who had sought shelter from the 
storm by adopting the faith of the oppressor. 


The Conversos, in steadily increasing numbers, had successfully 
worked out their destiny, accumulating honors, wealth and 
popular hatred. In both Castile and Aragon they filled lucrative 
and influential positions in the public service and their preponder- 
ance in Church and State was constantly becoming more marked. 
In Catalonia, however, they were regarded with contempt and, 
though the boast that Catalan blood was never polluted by inter- 
mixture is exaggerated, it is not wholly without foundation. 


1 Padre Fidel Fita, Boletin, XV, 443. 

? Amador de los Rios, III, 288-90.—Coleccion de Cédulas, I, 134. 

* Amador de los Rios, III, 170-1.—Merchan, La Juderfa y la Inquisicion de 
Ciudad-Real, I, 647. 

Lindo (Hist. of the Jews of Spain, p. 244) estimates the Jews of Castile at this 
period at between 200,000 and 300,000 over 16 years of age. Graetz assumes 
the total number as 150,000; Isidore Loeb at 50,000 or a little more.—Revue 
des Etudes Juives, 1887, p. 168. 


126 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Book I 


The same is true of Valencia, where intermarriage only occurred 
among the rural population. Throughout Spain, moreover, the 
farming of all the more important sources of revenue passed into 
their hands and thus they inherited the odium as well as the 
profits of the Jews.’ 

The beginning of the end was seen at Toledo where, in 1449, 
Alvaro de Luna made a demand on the city for a million mara- 
vedis for the defence of the frontier and it was refused. He 
ordered the tax-gatherers to collect it. They were Conversos and 
when they made the attempt the citizens arose and sacked and 
burnt not only their houses but those of the Conversos in general. 
The latter organized in self-defence and endeavored to suppress 
the disturbance but were defeated, when those who were wealthy 
were tortured and immense booty was obtained. In vain Juan IL 
sought to punish the city; the triumphant citizens, with the magis- 
trates at their head, organized a court in which the question was 
argued whether the Conversos could hold any public office. In 
spite of the evident illegality of this and of active opposition led 
by the famous Lope de Barrientos, Bishop of Cuenca, it was 
decided against the Conversos in a quasi-judicial sentence, known 
as the Sentencia-Estatuto which, in the bitterness of its language, 
reveals the extreme tension existing between the Old and New 
Christians. The Conversos were stigmatized as more than sus- 
pect in the faith and as in reality Jews; they were declared 
incapable of holding office and of bearing witness against Old 
Christians and those who held positions were ejected.?. The dis- 
turbances spread to Ciudad-Real, where the principal offices 
were held by Conversos. The Order of Calatrava, which had long 
endeavored ‘to get possession of the city, espoused the side of the 
Old Christians; there was considerable fighting in the streets and 
for five days the quarter occupied by the Conversos was exposed 
to pillage.* Thus the hatred which of old had been merely a 
matter of religion had become a matter of race. The one could 
be conjured away by baptism; the other was indelible and the 
change was of the most serious import, exercising for centuries its 
sinister influence on the fate of the Peninsula. 

The Sentencia-Estatuto threatened to introduce a new prin- 


1 Amador de los Rios, III, 88-9, 116-17, 206-10, 213-15, 217-18. 

? Amador de los Rios, IIT, 118-24.—Crénica de Juan II, afio xu, cap. ii, v. 
—Crénica de Alvaro de Luna, Tit. lxxxiii. 

* Merchan, La Juderfa y la Inquisicion de Ciudad-Real, I, 541-63. 


Cuap. IIT] PERSECUTION OF CONVERSOS 127 


ciple into public and canon law, both of which had always upheld 
the brotherhood of Christians and had encouraged conversions by 
prescribing the utmost favor for converts. Nicholas V was 
appealed to and responded, September 24, 1449, with a bull 
declaring that all the faithful are one; that the laws of Alfonso X 
and his successors, admitting converts to all the privileges of 
Christians, were to be enforced and he commissioned the Arch- 
bishops of Toledo and Seville, the Bishops of Palencia, Avila and 
Cordova, and the Abbot of San Fagun to excommunicate all who 
sought to invalidate them.’ More than this seems to have been 
needed and, in 1450, he formally excommunicated Pedro Sar- 
miento and his accomplices as the authors of the Sentencia- 
Kstatuto and again, in 1451, he repeated his bull of 1449. Finally, 
in the same year the synods of Vitoria and Alcald condemned it 
and Alfonso de Montalvo, the foremost jurist of the time, pro- 
nounced it to be illegal.” It never, in fact, was of binding force, 
but the effort made to set it aside shows how dangerous a menace 
it was and how it expressed a widespread public opinion. It 
was the first fitful gust of the tornado. 

Toledo remained the hot-bed of disturbance. In 1461 the 
martial Archbishop, Alonso Carrillo commissioned the learned 
Alonso de Oropesa, General of the Geronimites to investigate the 
cause of dissension. He did so and reported that there were faults 
on both sides and, at the request of the archbishop, he proceeded 
to write his Lwmen ad Revelationem Gentium to prove the unity of 
the faithful, but, while he was engaged in this pious labor the 
inextinguishable feud broke out afresh.2 Any chance disturbance 
might bring this about and the opportunity was furnished in 
1467, when the canons, who enjoyed a revenue based on the 
bread of the town of Maqueda, farmed it out to a Jew. Alvaro 
Gomez, an alcalde mayor, was lord of Maqueda; his alcaide beat 
the Jew and seized the bread for the use of the castle; the canons 
promptly imprisoned the alcaide and summoned Gémez to 
answer. When he came the quarrel grew bitterer; the Count of 
Cifuentes, leader of one of the factions of the city and protector 
of the Conversos, espoused the cause of Gémez, while Fernando 
de la Torre, a leader of the Conversos, hoping to revenge the defeat 
of 1449, boasted that he had at command four thousand well- 


1 Raynald. Annal. ann. 1449, n. 12. 
? Amador de los Rios, III, 125, 494.—Raynald. ann. 1451, n. 5, 
3 Nic. Antonio, Bibl. vetus Hispan., II, n. 565 


128 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox If 


armed fighting men, being six times more than the Old Christians 
could muster. Matters were ripe for an explosion and, on July 
21st, at a conference held in the cathedral, the followers of the 
two parties taunted each other beyond endurance; swords were 
drawn and blood polluted the sanctuary, though only one man 
was slain. The canons proceeded to fortify and garrison the 
cathedral, which was attacked the next day. The clergy, galled 
by the fire of the assailants, to create a diversion, started a con- 
flagration in the calle de la Chapineria, which spread until eight 
streets were destroyed—the richest in Toledo, crowded with shops 
full of costly merchandise. The device was successful; the Con- 
versos were disheartened and lost ground till, on the 29th, Cifuentes 
and Gémez fled, while Fernando de la Torre and his brother 
Alvaro were captured and hanged. The triumphant faction 
removed from office all their opponents and revived with addi- 
tional rigor the Sentencia-Estatuto. Toledo at the time belonged 
to the party of the pretender Alfonso XII but, when the citizens 
sent to him to confirm what they had done, he refused and the 
city soon afterwards transferred its allegiance to Henry IV.’ It 
is quite probable that, in reward for this, he confirmed the Sen- 
tencia-Estatuto for when, about the same time, Ciudad-Real 
revolted from Alfonso and adhered to Henry, he granted, July 14, 
1468, to that city that thenceforward no Converso should hold 
municipal office.? In the all-pervading lawlessness such disturb- 
ances as those of Toledo met with neither repression nor punish- 
ment. In 1470 Valladolid saw a similar tumult, in which the Old 
Christians and Conversos flew to arms and struggled for mastery. 
The former sent for Ferdinand and Isabella who came, but the 
majority of the citizens preferred Henry IV and the royal pair 
were glad to escape.* 

Everywhere the hatred between the Old Christians and the 
New was manifesting itself in this deplorable fashion. In Cérdova 
we are told that the Conversos were very rich and had bought. 
not only the offices but the protection of Alonso de Aguilar, 
whose power and high reputation commanded universal respect, 


+ In this I have chiefly followed a MS. account, evidently by a contemporary, 
preserved in the Bibl. nacional, MSS., G. 109. See also Amador de los Rios, ITI, 
145-51; Valera, Memorial de diversos Hazafias, cap. xxxviii; Castillo, Crénica 
de Enrique IV, cap. xe, xci. 

2 Merchan, op. cit., I, 641-38. 

3 Castillo, op. cit., cap. exlvi.—Mariana, Lib. xx11, cap. xv. 


Cuap. III] PERSECUTION OF CONVERSOS 129 


while the Old Christians ranged themselves under the Counts of 
Cabra and the Bishop, Pedro de Cordova y Solier. Only a spark 
was needed to produce an explosion and an accident during a 
procession, March 14, 1473, furnished the occasion. With shouts 
of viva la fe de Dios the mob arose and pillage, murder and fire 
were let loose upon the city. Alonso and his brother Gonsalvo 
—the future Great Captain—quelled the riot at the cost of no 
little bloodshed, but it burst forth again a few days later and, 
after a combat lasting forty-eight hours the Aguilars were forced 
to take refuge in the alcdzar carrying with them such Conversos 
and Jews as they could. Then followed a general sack in which 
every kind of outrage and cruelty was perpetrated, until the 
fury of the mob was exhausted by the lack of victims. Finally 
Alonso came to terms with the city authorities, who banished. 
the Conversos for ever and such poor wretches as had escaped 
torch and dagger were thrust forth to be robbed and murdered. 
with impunity on the highways.’ 

Laborers from the country, who chanced to be in Cérdova, 
carried the welcome news to neighboring places and the flame 
passed swiftly through Andalusia from town to town. Baena 
was kept quiet by the Count of Cabra, Palma by Luis Porto- 
carrero, Ecija by Fadrique Manrique and Seville and Jerez by 
Juan de Guzman and Rodrigo Ponce de Leon, but elsewhere the 
havoc was terrible. At Jaen, the Constable of Castile, Miguel 
Luis de Iranzo, was treacherously murdered while kneeling before 
the altar; his wife, Teresa de Torres, was barely able to escape, 
with her children, to the alcdzar, and the Conversos were plun- 
dered and dispatched. Only at Almodovar del Campo do we 
hear of any justice executed on the assassins, for there Rodrigo 
Giron, Master of Calatrava, hanged some of the most culpable. 
The king, we are told, when the news was brought to him, grieved. 
much, but inflicted no punishment.’ 

On the accession of Ferdinand and Isabella, in 1474, a Converso- 
of Cordova, Anton de Montoro, addressed to them a poem in 
which he gives a terrible picture of the murders committed with. 
impunity on his brethren, whose purity of faith he asserts. Fire: 


1 Castillo, op. cit., cap. clx.—Valera, Memorial de diversas Hazafias, cap.. 
elxxxiii.—Memorial hist. espafiol, VIII, 507. 

? Valera, cap. Ixxxiii-iv.—Castillo, cap. clx.—Memorial hist. espafiol, VIII, 
508.—Barrantes, Ilustraciones de la Casa de Niebla, Lib. vi11, cap. vi—Amador- 
de los Rios, ITI, 159-60. 

9 


130 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


and sword had just ravaged the aljama of Carmona and fresh 
disasters were threatening at Seville and Cérdova.' Dominicans 
and Franciscans were thundering from the pulpits and were 
calling on the faithful to purify the land from the pollution of 


Judaism, secret and open. It was commonly asserted and’ 


believed that the Christianity of the Conversos was fictitious, 
and fanaticism joined with envy and greed in stimulating the 
massacres that had become so frequent. The means adopted to 
win over the Jewish converts had not been so gentle as to encour- 
age confidence in the sincerity of their professions and, rightly 
or wrongly, they were almost universally suspected. The energy 
with which the new sovereigns enforced respect for the laws 
speedily put an end to the hideous excesses of the mob, for we 
hear of no further massacres, but the abhorrence entertained 
for the successful renegades, whose wealth and power were 
regarded as obtained by false profession of belief in Christ, was 
still wide-spread, though its more violent manifestations were 
restrained. Wise forbearance, combined with vigorous mainte- 
nance of order, would in time have brought about reconciliation, 
to the infinite benefit of Spain, but at a time when heresy was 
regarded as the greatest of crimes and unity of faith as the 
supreme object of statesmanship, wise forbearance and toleration 
were impossible. After suppressing turbulence the sovereigns 
therefore felt that there was still a duty before them to vindicate 
the faith. Thus, after long hesitation, their policy with regard 
to the Conversos was embodied in the Inquisition, introduced 
towards the end of 1480. The Jewish question required different 
treatment and it was solved, once for all, in most decisive fashion. 


The Inquisition had no jurisdiction over the Jew, unless he 
rendered himself amenable to it by some offence against the 
faith. He was not baptized; he was not a member of the Church 
and therefore was incapable of heresy, which was the object of 
inquisitional functions. He might, however, render himself 
subject to it by proselytism, by seducing Christians to embrace 
his errors, and this was constantly alleged against Jews, although 
their history shows that, unlike the other great religions, Judaism 
has ever been a national faith with no desire to spread beyond 
the boundaries of the race. As the chosen people, Israel has 


' Amador de los Rios, III, 234. 


Cuap. IIT] EXPULSION OF JEWS CONSIDERED 131 


never sought to share its God with the Gentiles. There was 
more foundation, probably, in the accusation that the secret 
perversity of the Conversos was encouraged by those who had 
remained steadfast in the faith, that circumcisions were secretly 
performed and that contributions to the synagogues were 
welcomed. 

While the object of the Inquisition was to secure the unity 
of faith, its founding destroyed the hope that ultimately the Jews 
would all be gathered into the fold of Christ. This had been the 
justification of the inhuman laws designed to render existence 
outside of the Church so intolerable that baptism would be sought 
as a relief from endless injustice, but the awful spectacle of the 
autos de fe and the miseries attendant on wholesale confiscations 
led the Jew to cherish more resolutely than ever the ancestral 
faith which served him as shield from the terrors of the Holy 
Office and the dreadful fate ever impending over the Conversos. 
His conversion could no longer be hoped for and, so long as he 
remained in Spain, the faithful would be scandalized by his 
presence and the converts would be exposed to the contamination 
of his society. The only alternative was his removal. 

Isabella tried a partial experiment of this kind in 1480, appar- 
ently to supplement the Inquisition, founded about the same 
time. Andalusia was the province where the Jews were most 
numerous and she commenced by ordering the expulsion from 
there of all who would not accept Christianity and threatening 
with death any new settlers... We have no details as to this 
measure and only know that it was several times postponed and 
that it was apparently abandoned.? A bull of Sixtus IV, in 
1484, shows us that Jews were still dwelling there undisturbed 
and, when the final expulsion took place in 1492, Bernaldez 
informs us that from Andalusia eight thousand households 
embarked at Cadiz, besides many at Cartagena and the ports 
of Aragon.’ 

That there was vacillation is highly probable, for policy and 
fanaticism were irreconcilable. The war with Granada was 
calling for large expenditures, to which the Jews were most 
useful contributors and the finances were in the hands of two 
leading Jews, Abraham Senior and. Isaac Abravanel, to whose 


1 Pulgar, Crénica de los Reyes Catdélicos, mn, xxvii. 
? Padre Fidel Fita, Boletin, XV, 323-5, 327, 328, 330; XXIII, 431. 
$ Historia de los Reyes Catdlicus, cap. cxi. 


132 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


skilful management its ultimate success was largely due. It may 
be that the threatened expulsion was rather a financial than a 
religious measure, adopted with a view of selling suspensions and 
exemptions, and this may also perhaps explain a similar course 
adopted by Ferdinand when, in May, 1486, he ordered the 
inquisitors of Aragon to banish all Jews of Saragossa from the 
archbishopric of Saragossa and the bishopric of Albarracin, in 
the same way as they had been banished from the sees of Seville, 
Cérdova and Jaen.’ The sovereigns knew when to be tolerant 
and when to give full rein to fanaticism, as was evinced in their 
treatment of renegades and Conversos at the capture of Malaga 
as contrasted with the liberal terms offered in the capitulations 
of Almeria and Granada. They were prepared to listen to the 
counsel of those who opposed all interference with the Jewish 
population, in whose favor there were powerful influences at 
work. Isabella apparently hesitated long between statesmanship 
and her conceptions of duty, while Torquemada never ceased to 
urge upon her the service to be rendered to Christ by clearing 
her dominions of the descendants of his crucifiers.’ 

There was no lack of effort to inflame public opinion and to 
excite still further the hostility so long and so carefully cultivated. 
A story had wide circulation that Maestre Ribas Altas, the royal 
physician, wore a golden ball attached to a cord around his neck; 


1 As this measure seems to have hitherto escaped attention, I give the text of 
the document—a passage in a letter from Ferdinand, May 12, 1486, to the inquis- 
itors of Saragossa. ‘ Devotos padres. Porque por esperiencia parece que todo 
el dafio que en los cristianos se ha fallado del delicto de la heregia ha procedido 
de la conversacion y practica que con los judios han recebido las personas de su 
linage, ningun tan comodo remedio hay como apartarlo dentre ellos de la manera 
que se ha fecho en el arzobispo de Sevilla e obispados de Cérdova e de Jaen, e 
pues en essa ciudad tanto e mas que en ninguna otra han dafiado, es nuestra 
voluntad que los judios dessa ciudad luego sean desterrados dessa dicha ciudad 
e de todo el arzobispado de Caragoca e obispado de Santa Maria de Albarracin 
como por el devoto padre Prior de Santa Cruz vos sera escrito e mandado.”— 
Archivo gén. de la C. de Aragon, Regist. 3684, fol. 96. 

While this is apparently confined to the Saragossa Jews, a letter of Ferdinand 
to Torquemada, July 22, 1486, alludes to the Jews of Teruel having been ordered 
by the inquisitors to depart within three months. He deems them justified in 
complaining that the term is too short, seeing that they have to pay and collect 
their debts and sell their houses and lands and he therefore suggests an extension 
of six months additional—See Appendix. 

3 Zurita, Hist. del Rey Hernando, Lib. 1, afio 1492.—Mariana, Lib. XXIV, 
cap. xviii—Pdramo de Orig. Officii S. inquisiions pp. 144, 156, 163 (Madi 
1598).—Garibay, Comp. Hist. Lib. xrx, c. iv 


Cuap. IIT] STIMULATION OF PREJUDICE Loo 


that Prince Juan, only son of the sovereigns, begged it of him 
and managed to open it, when he found inside a parchment on 
which was painted a crucifix with the physician in an indecent 
attitude; that he was so affected that he fell sick and, after much 
persuasion, revealed the cause, adding that he would not recover 
until the Jew was burnt, which was accordingly done and Ferdi- 
nand consented to the expulsion of the accursed: sect. Then 
we are told that, on Good Friday, 1488, some Jews, to avenge 
an insult, stoned a rude cross which stood on the hill of Gano 
near Casar de Palomero; they were observed and denounced, 
when the Duke of Alba burnt the rabbi and several of the culprits; 
the cross was repaired and carried in solemn procession to the 
parish church, where it still remains an object of popular vener- 
ation.” It is to this period also that we may presumably refer 
the fabrication of a correspondence, discovered fifty years later 
among the archives of Toledo by Archbishop Siliceo, between 
Chamorro, Prince of the Jews of Spain and Uliff, Prince of those 
of Constantinople, in which the latter, replying to a request for 
counsel, tells the former ‘‘as the king takes your property, make 
your sons merchants that they may take the property of the 
Christians; as he takes your lives, make your sons physicians 
and apothecaries, that they may take Christian lives; as he 
destroys your synagogues, make your sons ecclesiastics, that 
they may destroy the churches; as he vexes you in other ways, 
make your sons officials, that they may reduce the Christians 
to subjection and take revenge.’”* 

The most effective device, however, was a cruel one, carried 
out by Torquemada unshrinkingly to the end. In June, 1490, 
a Converso named Benito Garcia, on his return from a pilgrimage 
to Compostella, was arrested at Astorga on the charge of having 
a consecrated wafer in his knapsack. The episcopal vicar, Dr. 
Pedro de Villada, tortured him repeatedly till he obtained a 


1 An account of the expulsion at the end of the Libro Verde de Aragon states 
this to be the cause (Revista de Espafia, CVI, 567-8). Ribas Altas, however was 
burnt some years earlier, for in the Saragossa auto de fe of March 2, 1488, his 
mother Aldon¢a was burnt and the report alludes to his previous burning and 
relates the story.—Memoria de Diversos Autos, Auto 29 (see Appendix). 

? Barrantes, Aparato para la Historia de Extremadura, I, 458. 

$ Revista de Espafia, CVI, 568-70. This correspondence was long used as a 
weapon against the New Christians. See Vicente da Costa Mattos, Breve Dis- 
corso contra a heretica Perfidia do Judaismo, fol. 55-7, 166 (Lisboa, 1623), 
Rodrigo prints it (Historia verdadera de la Inquisicion, II, 47). 


134 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


confession implicating five other Conversos and six Jews in a 
plot to effect a conjuration with a human heart and a consecrated 
host, whereby to cause the madness and death of all Christians, 
the destruction of Christianity and the triumph of Judaism. 
Three of the implicated Jews were dead, but the rest of those 
named were promptly arrested and the trial was carried on by the 
Inquisition. After another year spent in torturing the accused, 
there emerged the story of the crucifixion at La Guardia of a 
Christian child, whose heart was cut out for the purpose of the 
conjuration. The whole tissue was so evidently the creation 
of the torture-chamber that it was impossible to reconcile the 
discrepancies in the confessions of the accused, although the 
very unusual recourse of confronting them was tried several 
times; no child had anywhere been missed and no remains were 
found on the spot where it was said to have been buried. The 
inquisitors finally abandoned the attempt to frame a consistent 
narrative and, on November 16, 1491, the accused were executed 
at Avila; the three deceased Jews were burned in effigy, the two 
living ones were torn with red-hot pincers and the Conversos were 
‘‘reconciled”’ and strangled before burning. The underlying 
purpose was revealed in the sentence read at the auto de fe, 
which was framed so as to bring into especial prominence the 
proselyting efforts of the Jews and the Judaizing propensities of 
the Conversos and no effort was spared to produce the widest 
impression on the people. We happen to know that the sentence 
was sent to La Guardia, to be read from the pulpit, and that it 
was translated into Catalan and similarly published in Barcelona, 
showing that it was thus brought before the whole population 
—a thing without parallel in the history of the Inquisition. The 
cult of the Saint-Child of La Guardia—El santo nifio de la Guardia 
—was promptly started with miracles and has been kept up to the 
present day, although the sanctity of the supposed martyr has 
never been confirmed by the Holy See. Torquemada’s object was 
gained for, though it would be too much to say that this alone 
won Ferdinand’s consent to the expulsion, it undoubtedly con- 
tributed largely to that result. The edict of expulsion, it is true, 
makes no direct reference to the case but, in its labored efforts 
to magnify the dangers of Jewish proselytism it reflects distinctly 
the admissions extorted from the accused by the Inquisition.’ 


‘ T have considered this notable case at some length in “Studies from the 
Religious History of Spain,” pp. 437-68. It can be studied with accuracy in the 


EE a 


Cuap. IIT] EXPULSION OF THE JEWS 135 


With the surrender of Granada in January, 1492, the work of 
the Reconquest was accomplished. The Jews had zealously 
contributed to it and had done their work too well. With the 
accession of a rich territory and an industrious Moorish popu- 
lation and the cessation of the drain of the war, even Ferdinand 
might persuade himself that the Jews were no longer financially 
indispensable. The popular fanaticism required constant repres- 
sion to keep the peace; the operations of the Inquisition de- 
stroyed the hope that gradual conversion would bring about the 
desired unity of faith and the only alternative was the removal 
of those who could not, without a miraculous change of heart, 
be expected to encounter the terrible risks attendant upon 
baptism. It is easy thus to understand the motives leading to 
the measure, without attributing it, as has been done, to greed 
for the victims’ wealth, for though, as we shall see, there are 
abundant evidences of a desire to profit by it, as a whole it was 
palpably undesirable financially. 

Thus the expulsion of the Jews from all the Spanish dominions 
came to be resolved upon. When this was bruited about the 
court, Abraham Senior and Abravanel offered a large sum from 
the aljamas to avert the blow. Ferdinand was inclined to accept 
it, but Isabella was firm. The story is current that, when the 
offer was under consideration, Torquemada forced his way into 
the royal presence and holding aloft a crucifix boldly addressed 
the sovereigns: ‘‘ Behold the crucified whom the wicked Judas 
sold for thirty pieces of silver. If you approve that deed, sell 
him for a greater sum. I resign my power; nothing shall be 
imputed to me but you will answer to God!’* Whether this be 
true or not, the offer was rejected and, on March 30th, the edict 
of expulsion was signed, though apparently there was delay in 
its promulgation, for it was not published in Barcelona until 


records of the trial of one of the accused, Jucé Franco, printed by Padre Fidel 
Fita (Boletin, XI, 1887) with ample elucidations. The Catalan version of the 
sentence is in Coleccciton de Documentos de la Corona de Aragon, XXVIII, 68. 
For the legend and cult of the Santo Nifio see Martinez Moreno, Historia del 
Martirio del Santo Nifio de la Guardia, Madrid, 1866. 

1 Pdéramo (p. 144) seems to be the earliest authority for this story and, as he 
tells it, it seems rather applicable to an attempt of the Conversos to buy off the 
Inquisition, but modern writers attribute it to the Jewish expulsion. See Llo- 
rente, Hist. Crit. cap. vim, Art. 1, n. 5; Hefele, Der Cardinal Ximenes, xvurf; 
Amador de los Rios, III, 272-3. 


136 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


May Ist.’ It gave the entire Jewish population of Spain until 
July 31st in which to change their religion or to leave the country, 
under penalty of death, which was likewise threatened for any 
attempt to return. During the interval they were taken under 
the royal protection; they were permitted to sell their effects 
and carry the proceeds with them, except that, under a general 
law, the export of gold and silver was prohibited.’ 

A supplementary edict of May 14th granted permission to sell 
lands, leaving but little time in which to effect such transactions 
and this was still more fatally limited in Aragon, where Ferdinand 
sequestrated all Jewish property in order to afford claimants 
and creditors the opportunity to prove their rights, the courts 
being ordered to decide all such cases promptly. Still less 
excusable was his detaining from all sales an amount equal to 
all the charges and taxes which the Jews would have paid him, 
thus realizing a full year’s revenue from the trifling sums obtained 
through forced sales by the unhappy exiles.? In Castile, the inex- 
tricable confusion arising from.the extensive commercial transac- 
tions of the Jews led to the issue, May 30th, of a decree addressed 
to all the officials of the land, ordering all interested parties to 
be summoned to appear within twenty days to prove their 
claims, which the courts must settle by the middle of July. All 
debts falling due prior to the date of departure were to be promptly 
paid; if due to Christians by Jews who had not personal effects 
sufficient to satisfy them, the creditors were to take land at an 
appraised valuation or be paid out of other debts paid by Jews. 
For debts falling due subsequently, if due by Jews, the debtors 
had to pay at once or furnish adequate security; if due by Chris- 
tians or Moors, the creditors were either to leave powers to collect 
at maturity or to sell the claims to such purchasers as they could 
find.* These regulations afford us a glimpse into the complexities 
arising from the convulsion thus suddenly precipitated and, as 
the Jews were almost universally creditors, we can readily 
imagine how great were their losses and how many Christian 
debtors must have escaped payment. 


1 Manuel de novells Ardits vulgarment appellat Dietari del Antich Consell 
Barceloni, III, 94 (Barcelona, 1894). 

? Nueva Recopilacion Lib. vin, Tit. ii, ley 2.—Novisima Recop., Lib. x1, Tit. i, 
ley 3.—Zurita, Hist. del Rey Hernando, Lib. I, afio 1492.—Amador de los 
Rios, III, 603-9.—Boletin, XI, 425, 512. 

* Zurita, loc. cit. * See Appendix. 


Cuap. IIT] EXPULSION OF THE JEWS 13% 


The sovereigns also shared in the spoils. When the exiles 
reached the seaports to embark they found that an export duty 
of two ducats per head had been levied upon them, which they 
were obliged to pay out of their impoverished store.t Moreover, 
the threat of confiscation for those who overstayed the time was 
rigorously enforced and, in some cases at least, the property 
thus seized was granted to nobles to compensate their losses by 
the banishment of their Jews.’ All effects left behind also were 
seized; in many cases the dangers of the journey, the prohibition 
to carry coin and the difficulty of procuring bills of exchange, led 
the exiles to make deposits with trustworthy friends to be 
remitted to them in their new homes, all of which was seized 
by the crown. The amount of this was sufficient to require a 
regular organization of officials deputed to hunt up these deposits 
and other fragments of property that could be escheated, and 
we find correspondence on the subject as late as 1498.2 Efforts 
were even also made to follow exiles and secure their property 
on the plea that they had taken with them prohibited articles, 
and Henry VII of England and Ferdinand of Naples were 
appealed to for assistance in cases of this description.‘ 

The terror and distress of the exodus, we are told, were greatly 
increased by an edict issued by Torquemada, as inquisitor- 
general, in April, forbidding any Christian, after August 9th, from 
holding any communication with Jews, or giving them food or 
shelter, or aiding them in any way.® Such addition to their woes 
was scarce necessary, for it would be difficult to exaggerate the 
misery inflicted on a population thus suddenly uprooted from 
a land in which their race was older than that of their oppressors. 
Stunned at first by the blow, as soon as they rallied from the 
shock, they commenced preparations for departure. An aged 
rabbi, Isaac Aboab, with thirty prominent colleagues, was com- 
missioned to treat with Jo&o II of Portugal for refuge in his 
dominions. He drove a hard bargain, demanding a cruzado a 
head for permission to enter and reside for six months.’ For 


1 Péramo, p. 167.—TIlescas, Historia Pontifical, P. 1, Lib. vi, cap. 20, 2 2. 

? Amador de los Rios, III, 403. 

3 Llorente, Hist. crit., Append. v1.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 1* 
Lib. 3, fol. 87. * Bergenroth, Calendar of Spanish State Papers, I, 51. 

® Zurita, loc. cit—P&ramo, p. 166. 

® Graetz VIII, 348.—Bernaldez, cap. cx1r.—The cruzado of Portugal was 
worth 365 maravedis, the same as the dobla de la banda. The ducat was worth 
374. 


138 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


those who were near the coasts, arrangements were made for 
transhipment by sea, mostly from Cadiz and Barcelona on the 
south and Laredo on the north. To the north-east, Navarre 
afforded an asylum, by order of Jean d’Albret and his wife 
Leonora, although the cities were somewhat recalcitrant.1 As 
the term approached, two days’ grace were allowed, bringing it 
to August 2d, the 9th of Ab, a day memorable in Jewish annals 
for its repeated misfortunes.’ 

The sacrifices entailed on the exiles were enormous. To realize 
in so limited a time on every species of property not portable, 
with means of transportation so imperfect, was almost impossible 
and, in a forced sale of such magnitude, the purchasers had a 
vast advantage of which they fully availed themselves. An 
eye-witness tells us that the Christians bought their property 
for a trifle; they went around and found few buyers, so that they 
were compelled to give a house for an ass and a vineyard for a 
little cloth or linen: in some places the miserable wretches, 
unable to get any price, burnt their homes and the aljamas 
bestowed the communal property on the cities. Their synagogues 
they were not allowed to sell, the Christians taking them and 
converting them into churches, wherein to worship a God of 
justice and love. The cemeteries, for which they felt peculiar 
solicitude, were in many places made over to the cities, on con- 
dition of preservation from desecration and use only for pasturage; 
where this was not done they were confiscated and Torquemada 
obtained a fragment of the spoil by securing, March 23, 1494, 
from Ferdinand and Isabella, the grant of that of Avila for his 
convent of Santo Tomas.‘ 

The resolute constancy displayed in this extremity was 
admirable. There were comparatively few renegades and, if 
Abraham Senior was one of them, it is urged in extenuation 
that Isabella, who was loath to lose his services, threatened, if 
he persisted in his faith, to adopt still sharper measures against 
his people and he, knowing her capacity in this direction, sub- 
mitted to baptism; he and his family had for god-parents the 
sovereigns and Cordinal Gonzalez de Mendoza; they assumed the 


1 Lindo, History of the Jews, p. 287.—Chronicle of Rabbi Joseph ben Joshua 
ben Meir, I, 327. 

? Graetz, VIII, 349. 

’ Bernaldez, cap. cx.—Barrantes, Ilustraciones de la Casa de Niebla, P. rx, 
cap. 2.—Amador de los Rios, III, 311.—Lindo, p. 292 

* Amador de los Rios, III, 312.—Boletin, IX, 267, 286; XI, 427, 586 


=r = ——, _- 


Cuap. IIT] EXPULSION OF THE JEWS 139 


name of Coronel which long remained distinguished.’ The frailes 
exerted themselves everywhere in preaching, but the converts: 
were few and only of the lowest class; the Inquisition had changed 
the situation and San Vicente Ferrer himself would have found 
missionary work unfruitful, for the dread of exile was less than 
that of the Holy Office and the quemadero. 

There was boundless mutual helpfulness; the rich aided the 
poor and they made ready as best they could to face the perils 
of the unknown future. Before starting, all the boys and girls. 
over twelve were married. Early in July the exodus commenced 
-and no better idea of this pilgrimage of grief can be conveyed 
than by the simple narrative of the good cura of Palacios. Dis- 
regarding, he says, the wealth they left behind and confiding in 
the blind hope that God would lead them to the promised land, 
they left their homes, great and small, old and young, on foot, 
on horseback, on asses or other beasts or in wagons, some falling, 
others rising, some dying, others being born, others falling sick. 
There was no Christian who did not pity them; everywhere they 
were invited to conversion and some were baptized, but very 
few, for the rabbis encouraged them and made the women and 
children play on the timbrel. Those who went to Cadiz hoped 
that God would open a path for them across the sea; but they 
stayed there many days, suffering much and many wished that: 
they had never been born. From Aragon and Catalonia they 
put to sea for Italy or the Moorish lands or whithersoever fortune 
might drive them. Most of them had evil fate, robbery and 
murder by sea and in the lands of their refuge. This is shown 
by the fate of those who sailed from Cadiz. They had to embark 
in twenty-five ships of which the captain was Pero Cabron; they 
sailed for Oran where they found the corsair Fragoso and his. 
fleet; they promised him ten thousand ducats not to molest them, 
to which he agreed, but night came on and they sailed for Arcilla. 
(a Spanish settlement in Morocco), where a tempest scattered 
them. Sixteen ships put into Cartagena, where a hundred and 
fifty souls landed and asked for baptism; then the fleet went to 
Malaga, where four hundred more did the same. ‘The rest 
reached Arcilla and went to Fez. Multitudes also sailed from 
Gibraltar to Arcilla, whence they set out for Fez, under guard 
of Moors hired for the purpose, but they were robbed on the 


1 Graetz, VIII, 348.—Chroénicon de Valladolid (Coleccion de Documentos, 
XIII, 195). 


140 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


journey and their wives and daughters were violated. Many 
returned to Arcilla, where the new arrivals, on hearing of this, 
remained, forming a large camp. Then they divided into two 
parties, one persisting in going to Fez, the other preferring 
baptism at Arcilla, where the commandant, the Count of Boron, 
treated them kindly and the priests baptized them in squads 
with sprinklers. The count sent them back to Spain and, up to 
1496, they were returning for baptism—in Palacios, Bernaldez 
baptized as many as a hundred, some of them being rabbis. 
Those who reached Fez were naked and starving and lousy. 
The king, seeing them a burden, permitted them to return and 
they straggled back to Arcilla, robbed and murdered on the road, 
the women violated and the men often cut open in search of gold 
thought to be concealed in their stomachs. Those who remained 
in Fez built a great Jewry for themselves of houses of straw; one 
night it took fire, burning all their property and fifty or a hundred 
souls—after which came a pestilence, carrying off more than 
four thousand. Ferdinand and Isabella, seeing that all who 
could get back returned for baptism, set guards to keep them 
out unless they had money to support themselves.’ 

The whole world was pitiless to these wretched outcasts, 
against whom every man’s hand was raised. Those who sought 
Portugal utilized the six months allotted to them by sending a 
party to Fez to arrange for transit there; many went and formed 
part of the luckless band whose misfortunes we have seen. 
Others remained, the richer paying the king a hundred cruzados 
per household, the poorer eight cruzados a head, while a thousand, 
who could pay nothing, were enslaved. These King Manoel 
emancipated, on his accession in 1495, but in 1497 he enforced 
conversion on all. Then in Lisbon, at Easter, 1506, a New 
Christian in a Dominican church, chanced to express a doubt 
as to a miraculous crucifix, when he was dragged out by the hair 
and slain; the Dominicans harangued the mob, parading the 
streets with the crucifix and exciting popular passion till a 
massacre ensued in which the most revolting cruelties were 
perpetrated. It raged for three days and ended only when no 
more victims could be found, the number of slain being estimated 
at several thousand.’ The further fate of these refugees we shall 
have occasion to trace hereafter. 


1 Bernaldez, cap. CXII, CXIII. 
? Damiado de Goes, Chronica do Rei D. Manoel, P. 1, cap. cii, ciii. 


Cuap. III] FATE OF THE EXILES 141 


In Navarre, where the exiles had been kindly received, the 
era of toleration was brief. In 1498, an edict, based on that of 
Ferdinand and Isabella, gave them the alternative of baptism 
or expulsion and, at the same time, such difficulties were thrown 
in the way of exile that they mostly submitted to baptism and 
remained a discredited class, subjected to numerous disabilities. 
Naples, whither numbers flocked, afforded an inhospitable ref- 
uge. In August, 1492, nine caravels arrived there, loaded with 
Jews and infected with pestilence, which they communicated to 
the city, whence it spread through the kingdom and raged for 
a year, causing a mortality of twenty thousand. Then, in the 
confusion following the invasion of Charles VIII, in 1495, the 
people rose against them; many abandoned their religion to 
escape slaughter or slavery; many were carried off to distant 
lands and sold as slaves; this tribulation lasted for three years, 
during which those who were steadfast in the faith were im- 
prisoned or burnt or exposed to the caprices of the mob.” Turkey, 
on the whole, proved the most satisfactory refuge, where Bajazet 
found them such profitable subjects that he ridiculed the wisdom 
popularly ascribed to the Spanish sovereigns who could commit 
so great an act of folly. Though exposed to occasional perse- 
cution, they continued to flourish; most of the existing Jews of 
Turkey in Europe and a large portion of those of Turkey in Asia, 
are descendants of the exiles; they absorbed the older com- 
munities and their language is still the Spanish of the sixteenth 
century.* 

When the fate of the exiles was, for the most part, so unendur- 
able, it was natural that many should seek to return to their 
native land and, as we have seen from Bernaldez, large numbers 
did so. At first this was tacitly permitted, on condition of 
conversion, provided they brought money with them, but the 
sovereigns finally grew fearful that the purity of the faith would 
be impaired and, in 1499, an explanatory edict was issued, 
decreeing death and confiscation for any Jew entering Spain, 
whether a foreigner or returning exile, even if he asked for 


1 Chronicles of Rabbi Joseph ben Joshua ben Meir, I, 328.—Amador de los 
Rios, III, 332-3. 

? Amador de los Rios, III, 320.—Zurita, loc. cit. 

* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 927, fol. 124.—Isidore Loeb (Revue 
des Etudes Juives, 1887, p. 179).—Ilescas, Historia Pontifical, P. 11, Lib. vi, 
cap. 20, ? 2.—Kayserling, Biblioteca Espafiola-Portugueza-Judaica, p. xi (Stras- 
bourg, 1890). 


142 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boox I 


baptism, unless beforehand he sent word that he wished to 
come for that purpose, when he was to be baptized at the port 
of entry and a notarial act was to be taken. That this savage 
edict was pitilessly enforced 1s manifested by several cases in 
1500 and 1501. Moreover, all masters of Jewish slaves were 
ordered to send them out of the country within two months, 
unless they would submit to baptism.’ Spain was too holy a 
land to be polluted with the presence of a Jew, even in captivity. 

In the absence of trustworthy statistics, all estimates of the 
number of victims must be more or less a matter of guess-work 
and consequently they vary with the impressions or imagination 
of the annalist. Bernaldez informs us that Rabbi Mair wrote to 
Abraham Senior that the sovereigns had banished 35,000 vassals, 
that is, 35,000 Jewish households, and he adds that, of the ten 
or twelve rabbis whom he baptized on their return, a very 
intelligent one, named Zentollo of Vitoria, told him that there 
were in Castile more than 30,000 married Jews and 6000 in the 
kingdoms of Aragon, making 160,000 souls when the edict was 
issued, which is probably as nearly correct an estimate as we can 
find.? With time the figures grew. Albertino, Inquisitor of Valen- 
cia, in 1534, quotes Reuchlin as computing the number of exiles at. 
420,000. The cautious Zurita quotes Bernaldez and adds that. 
others put the total at 400,000, while Mariana tells us that most 
authors assert the number of households to have been 170,000, 
and some put the total at 800,000 souls; Pdramo quotes the 
figures of 124,000 households or over 600,000 souls.* Isidore 
Loeb, after an exhaustive review of all authorities, Jewish and 
Christian, reaches the estimate’— 


OMG Tantei este cal cendis inte neat ali k Oak OI 
Baptized ese Wee. Ae Sern OU ca 
Died Le 8A nae ay seies eu al ee ae eat 

235,000 


and this, in view of the diminished number of Jews, as shown by 
the Repartimiento of 1474 (p. 125) is probably too large an 
estimate. | 


1 Nueva Recopilacion, Lib. vir, Tit. ii, ley 3—Novfs. Recop., Lib. x11, Tit. i,. 
ley 4.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 1. 

* Bernaldez, cap. CXI. 

3 Arnaldin. Albertinus de Heereticis, col. lix (Valentise, 1534). 

¢ Zurita, loc. cit—Mariana, Tom. VIII, p. 336 (Ed. 1795).—Pé4ramo, p. 167. 

5 Revue des Etudes Juives, 1887, p. 182. 


Cuap. IIT] CONTEMPORARY OPINION 143 


Whatever may have been the number, the sum of human 
misery was incomputable. Rabbi Joseph, whose father was one 
of the exiles, eloquently describes the sufferings of his race: 
“‘For some of them the Turks killed to take out the gold which 
they had swallowed to hide it; some of them hunger and the 
plague consumed and some of them were cast naked by the 
captains on the isles of the sea; and some of them were sold for 
men-servants and maid-servants in Genoa and its villages and 
some of them were cast into the sea. . . . For there were 
among those who were cast into the isles of the sea upon Provence 
a Jew and his old father fainting from hunger, begging bread, 
for there was no one to break unto him in a strange country. 
And the man went and sold his son for bread to restore the soul 
of the old man. And it came to pass, when he returned to his 
old father, that he found him fallen down dead and he rent his 
clothes. And he returned unto the baker to take his son and the 
baker would not give him back and he cried out with a loud and 
bitter cry for his son and there was none to deliver.’’* Penniless, 
friendless and despised they were cast forth into a world which 
had been taught that to oppress them was a service to the 
Redeemer. 

Yet such were the convictions of the period, in the fifteenth 
century after Christ had died for man, that this crime against — 
humanity met with nothing but applause among contemporaries. 
Men might admit that it was unwise from the point of view 
of statesmanship and damaging to the prosperity of the land, 
but this only enhanced the credit due to the sovereigns whose 
piety was equal to the sacrifice. When, in 1495, Alexander VI 
granted to them the proud title of Catholic Kings, the expulsion 
of the Jews was enumerated among the services to the faith 
entitling them to this distinction.2 Even so liberal and cultured 
a thinker as Gian Pico della Mirandola, praises them for it, 
while he admits that even Christians were moved to pity by the 
calamities of the sufferers, nearly all of whom were consumed 
by shipwreck, pestilence and hunger, rendering the destruction 
equal to that inflicted by Titus and Hadrian.* It is true that 
Machiavelli, faithful to his general principles, seeks to find in 
Ferdinand’s participation a political rather than a religious 


1 Chronicles of Rabbi Joseph ben Joshua ben Meir, I, 323-4. 
? Pet. Martyr. Angler. Lib. vit1, Epist. 157. 
3 Joan. Pici Mirandule in Astrologiam, Lib. v, cap. xii. 


144 THE JEWS AND THE CONVERSOS [Boor I 


motive, but even he characterizes the act as a pietosa crudelta.* 
So far, indeed, was it from being a cruelty, in the eyes of the 
theologians of the period, that Ferdinand was held to have 
exercised his power mercifully, for Arnaldo Albertino proved by 
the canon law that he would have been fully justified in putting 
them all to the sword and seizing their property.’ 


The Edict of Expulsion proclaimed to the world the policy 
which in its continuous development did so much for the abase- 
ment of Spain. At the same time it closed the career of avowed 
Jews in the Spanish dominions. Henceforth we shall meet with 
them as apostate Christians, the occasion and the victims of the 
Inquisition. 


1-Tl Principe, cap. xxi. 2 Arnald. Albertinus de Hereticis, col. lix. 


GUAR Tri he IV. 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION. 


Mucus as the Conversos had gained, from a worldly point of 
view, by their change of religion, their position, in one respect, 
as we have seen, was seriously deteriorated. As Jews they might 
be despoiled and humiliated, confined in narrow Jewries and 
restricted as to their careers and means of livelihood, but withal 
they enjoyed complete freedom of faith, in which they were 
subjected only to their own rabbis. They were outside of the 
Church and the Church claimed no jurisdiction over them in 
matters of religion, so long as they did not openly blaspheme 
Christianity or seek to make proselytes. As soon, however, as 
the convert was baptized he became a member of the Church 
and for any aberration from orthodoxy he was amenable to its 
laws. As the Inquisition had never existed in Castile and was 
inactive in Aragon, while the bishops, who held ordinary juris- 
diction over heresy and apostasy, were too turbulent and worldly 
to waste thought on the exercise of their authority in such 
matters, the Conversos seem never to have recognized the 
possibility of being held to account for any secret leaning to the 
faith which they had ostensibly abandoned. The circumstances 
under which the mass of conversions was effected—threats of 
massacre or the wearing pressure of inhuman laws—were not 
such as to justify confidence in the sincerity of the neophytes, 
nor, when baptism was administered indiscriminately to multi- 
tudes, was there a possibility of detailed instruction in the 
complicated theology of their new faith. Rabbinical Judaism, 
moreover, so entwines itself with every detail of the believer’s 
daily life, and attaches so much importance to the observances 
which it enjoins, that it was impossible for whole communities 
thus suddenly Christianized, to abandon the rites and usages 
which, through so many generations, had become a part of exist- 
ence itself. Earnest converts might have brought up their 
children as Christians and the grandchildren might have out- 
grown the old customs, but the Conversos could not be earnest 

10 (145) 


146 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


converts, and the sacred traditions, handed down by father to 
son from the days of the Sanhedrin, were too precious to be set 
aside. The Anusim, as they were known to their Hebrew 
brethren, thus were unwilling Christians, practising what Jewish 
rites they dared, and it was held to be the duty of all Jews to 
bring them back to the true faith.’ 

As soon, therefore, as the Church had gained her new recruits 
she began to regard them with a pardonable degree of suspicion, 
although she seems to have made no effort to instruct them in 
her doctrines after hurriedly baptizing them by the thousand. 
In 1429 the council of Tortosa indignantly denounced the 
unspeakable cruelty of the Conversos who, with damnable 
negligence, permit their children to remain in servitude of the 
devil by omitting to have them baptized. To remedy this the 
Ordinaries were ordered, by the free use of ecclesiastical censures, 
and by calling in if necessary the secular arm, to cause all such 
children to be baptized within eight days after birth, and all 
temporal lords were commanded to lend their aid in this pious 
work. The outlook, certainly, was not-promising that the 
coming generation should be free from the inveterate Jewish 
errors. How little concealment, indeed, was thought necessary 
by the Conversos, so long as they exhibited a nominal adherence 
to Catholicism, is plainly shown by the testimony in the early 
trials before the Inquisition, where servants and neighbors give 
ample evidence as to Jewish observances openly followed. Still 
more conclusive is a case occurring, in 1456, in Rosellon, which, 
although at the time held in pawn by France, was subject to 
the Inquisition of Aragon. Certain Conversos not only persisted 
in Jewish practices, such as eating meat in lent, but forced their 
Christian servants to do likewise, and when the inquisitor, Fray 
Mateo de Rapica, with the aid of the Bishop of Elna, sought to 


1 Censura et Confutatio Libri Talmud (Boletin, XXIII, 371-4). 

The Jews distinguished between unwilling converts, whom they termed 
Anusim and voluntary converts, or Meschudanim; the former they pitied and 
helped, the latter they abhorred. The Judaizing Christians were also sometimes 
called Alboraycos, from alborak (the lightning), the marvellous horse brought to 
Mahomet by the angel Gabriel, which was neither a horse nor a mule nor male 
nor female (Ibid. p. 379). A still more abusive popular appellation was Marrano, 
which means both hog and accursed. For the controverted derivation of the 
word see Graetz, Geschichte der Juden, VIII, 76 (Ed. 1890), who also (p. 284) 
admits the attachment of many of the Conversos to the old religion. 

2 CO. Dertusan. ann. 1429, c. ix (Aguirre, V, 337). 


Cuap. IV] JUDAISM OF CONVERSOS 147 


reduce them to conformity, they defiantly published a defamatory 
libel upon him and, with the assistance of certain laymen, afflicted 
him with injuries and expenses.’ It was not without cause that, 
when Bishop Alfonso de Santa Maria procured the decree of 1434 
from the council of Basle, he included a clause branding as 
heretics all Conversos who adhered to Jewish superstitions, 
directing bishops and inquisitors to enquire strictly after them 
and to punish them condignly, and pronouncing liable to the 
penalties of fautorship all who support them in those practices.” 
The decree, of course, proved a dead letter, but none the less 
was it the foreshadowing of the Inquisition. When Nicholas V, 
in 1449, issued his bull in favor of the Conversos, he followed 
the example of the council of Basle, in excepting those who 
secretly continued to practise Jewish rites. In the methods com- 
monly employed to procure conversions the result was inevitable 
and incurable. 

What rendered this especially serious was the success of the 
Conversos in obtaining high office in Church and State. Im- 
portant sees were occupied by bishops of Jewish blood; the 
chapters, the monastic orders and the curacies were full of them; 
they were prominent in the royal council and everywhere enjoyed 
positions of influence. The most powerful among them—the 
Santa Marfas, the Davilas and their following—had turned 
against the royal favorite Alvaro de Luna and, with the dis- 
contented nobles, were plotting his ruin, when he seems to have 
conceived the idea that, if he could introduce the Inquisition 
in Castile, he might find in it a weapon wherewith to subdue 
them. At least this is the only explanation of an application 
made to Nicholas V, in 1451, by Juan II, for a delegation of 
papal inquisitorial power for the chastisement of Judaizing 
Christians. The popes had too long vainly desired to introduce 
the Inquisition in Castile for Nicholas to neglect this opportunity. 
He promptly commissioned the Bishop of Osma, his vicar 
general, and the Scholasticus of Salamanca as inquisitors, either 
by themselves or through such delegates as they might appoint, 
to investigate and punish without appeal-.all.such offenders, to 
deprive them of ecclesiastical dignities and benefices and of 
temporal possessions, to pronounce them incapable of holding 
such positions in future, to imprison and degrade them, and, if 


* Ripoll Bullar. Ord. FF. Preedic. III, 347. 
2 C. Basiliens. Sess. xrx, c. vi (Harduin. VIII, 11938). 


148 . ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


the offence required, to abandon them to the secular arm for 
burning. Full power was granted to perform any acts necessary 
or opportune to the discharge of these duties and, if resistance 
were offered, to invoke the aid of the secular power. All this 
was within the regular routine of the inquisitorial office, but 
there was one clause which showed that the object of the measure 
was the destruction of de Luna’s enemies, the Converso bishops, 
for the commission empowered the appointees to proceed even 
against bishops—a faculty never before granted to inquisitors 
and subsequently, as we shall see, withheld when the new Inqui- 
sition was organized.’ All this was the formal establishment of 
the Inquisition on Castilian soil and, if circumstances had per- 
mitted its development, it would not have been left for Isabella 
to introduce the institution. The Inquisition, however, rested 
on the secular power for its efficiency. In Spain, especially, 
there was little respect for the naked papal authority, while that 
of Juan II was too much enfeebled to enable him to establish 
so serious an innovation. The New Christians recognized that 
their safety depended on de Luna’s downfall; the conspiracy 
against him won over the nerveless Juan II and, in 1453, he was 
hurriedly condemned and executed. Naturally the bull remained 
inoperative, and, some ten years later, Alonso de Espina feelingly 
complains ‘‘Some are heretics and Christian perverts, others are 
Jews, others Saracens, others devils. There is no one to invest- 
igate the errors of the heretics. The ravening wolves, O Lord, 
have entered thy flock, for the shepherds are few; many are 
hirelings and as hirelings they care only for shearing and not 
for feeding thy sheep.’” 

To Fray Alonso de Espina may be ascribed a large share in 
hastening the development of organized persecution in Spain, by 
inflaming the race hatred of recent origin which already needed 
no stimulation. He was aman of the highest reputation for 
learning and sanctity and when, early in his career, he was 
discouraged by the slender result of his preaching, a miracle 
revealed to him the favor of Heaven and induced him to per- 


1 Raynald. Annal. ann. 1451, n. 6. 

? Fortalicium Fidei, Prolog. (Ed. 1494, fol. ii#), The date of the Fortalictum 
is commonly assigned to 1459, the year which it bears upon its rubric, but on 
fol. lxxviib the author speaks of 1460 years having elapsed since the birth of 
Christ and, as this is at nearly the first third of the book, it may not have been 
completed for a year or two later. 


Cuap. IV] ALONSO DE ESPINA 149 


severe.’ In 1453 we find him administering to Alvaro de Luna 
the last consolations of religion at his hurried execution, and he 
became the confessor of Henry IV. In 1454, when a child was 
robbed and murdered at Valladolid and the body was scratched 
up by dogs, the Jews were, of course, suspected and confession 
was obtained by torture. Alonso happened to be there and 
aroused much public excitement by his sermons on the subject, 
in which he asserted that the Jews had ripped out the child’s 
heart, had burnt it and, by mingling the ashes with wine, had 
made an unholy sacrament, but unfortunately, as he tells us, 
bribery of the judges and of King Henry enabled the offenders 
to escape.* The next year, 1455, as Provincial of the Observantine 
Franciscans, he was engaged in an unsuccessful attempt to drive 
the Conventuals out of Segovia or to obtain a separate convent 
for the Observantines.* Thenceforth he seems to have concen- 
trated his energies on the endeavor to bring about the forced 
conversion of the Jews and to introduce the Inquisition as a 
corrective of the apostasy of the Conversos. He is usually con- 
sidered to have himself belonged to the class of Conversos who. 
entertained an inextinguishable hatred for their former brethren, 
but there is no evidence of this and the probabilities are altogether 
against it.° 

His Fortalicvum Fidei is a deplorable exhibition of the fanatic 
passions which finally dominated Spain. He rakes together, 
from the chronicles of all Europe, the stories of Jews slaying 
Christian children in their unholy rites, of their poisoning wells 
and fountains, of their starting conflagrations and of all the 
other horrors by which a healthy detestation of the unfortunate 
race was created and stimulated. The Jewish law, he tells us, 


1 Nicol. Anton. Bibl. Vet. Hispan. Lib. x, cap. ix. 

2 Amador de los Rios, III, 60, 136.—Valera, Memoria de diversas Hazafias, 
cap. iv. 

8 Fortalicium Fidei, fol. cxlvi. 

‘ Colmenares, Hist. de Segovia, cap. xxxi, 3 3.—Valera, loc. cit. 

5 All recent Spanish authorities, I believe, assume that Fray Alonso was a 
Converso, but the learned Nicol4s Antonio (loc. cit.) says nothing about it, and 
Jo. Chr. Wolff (Bibl. Hebree II, 1123) points out that he nowhere alludes to his 
own experience as he could scarce have failed to do when accusing the Jews of 
matters which they denied. He cites (fol. cxlix®) Pablo de Santa Maria, Bishop 
of Burgos, for their prayers against Christians and another learned Converso as 
to a secret connected with the Hebrew letters (fol. xciv@). His knowledge con- 
cerning the Jews was thus wholly at second hand and his assaults on the Judaiz- 
ing of the Conversos have every appearance of emanating from an Old Christian. 


150 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


commands them to slay Christians and to despoil them whenever 
practicable and they obey it with quenchless hatred and insatiable 
thirst for revenge. Thrice a day in their prayers they repeat 
‘‘Let there be no hope for Meschudanim (Conversos); may all 
heretics and all who speak against Israel be speedily cut off; 
may the kingdom of the proud be broken and destroyed and 
may all our enemies be crushed and humbled speedily in our 
days!’* But the evil now wrought by Jews is trifling to that 
which they will work at the coming of Antichrist, for they will 
be his supporters. Alexander the Great shut them up in the 
mountains of the Caspian, adjoining the realms of the Great 
Khan or monarch of Cathay. There, between the castles of Gog 
and Magog, confined by an enchanted wall, they have multiplied 
until now they are numerous enough to fill twenty-four kingdoms. 
When Antichrist comes they will break loose and rally around 
him, as likewise will all the Jews of the Diaspora, for they will 
regard him as their promised Messiah and will worship him as 
their God, and with their united aid he will overrun the earth. 
With such eventualities in prospect it is no wonder that Fray 
Alonso could convince himself, in opposition to the canon law, 
thatthe forced conversion of the Jews was lawful and expedient, 
as well as the baptism of their children without their consent.’ 
When such was the temper in which a man of distinguished 
learning and intelligence discussed the relations between Jews 
and Christians, we can imagine the character of the sermons in 
which, from numerous pulpits, the passions of the people were 
inflamed against their neighbors. 

If open Judaism thus was abhorrent, still worse was theinsidious 
heresy of the Conversos who pretended to be Christians and who 
more or less openly continued to practise Jewish rites and per- 
verted the faithful by their influence and example. These 
abounded on every hand and there was scarce an effort made to 
repress or to punish them. The law, from the earliest times, 
provided the death penalty for their offence, but there was none 
found to enforce it. Fray Alonso dolefully asserts that they 


1 The prayers attributed to the Jews were the subject of repeated repressive 
legislation. See Ordenanzas Reales, vii, iii, 34. 

? Fortalicium Fidei, fol. exli-ix, elxxxi-ui. 

8 Fuero Juzgo, xu, iii, 27.—Fuero Real, rv, i, 1—Partidas, vi, xxiv, 7. In 
fact, these laws seem to have been a dead letter almost from the first. I have 
not met with an instance of their enforcement. 


Cuap. IV] JUDAISM OF CONVERSOS 151 


succeeded by their presents in so blinding princes and prelates 
that they were never punished and that, when one person accused 
them, three would come forward in their favor. He relates an 
instance of such an attempt, in 1458 at Formesta, where a barber 
named Fernando Sanchez publicly maintained monotheism. 
Fortunately Bishop Pedro of Palencia had zeal enough to prose- 
cute him, when his offence was proved and, under fear of the 
death penalty, he recanted, but when he was condemned to 
imprisonment for life so much sympathy was excited by the 
unaccustomed severity that, in accordance with numerous 
petitions, the sentence was commuted to ten years’ exile. In 
1459, at Segovia, a number of Conversos were by an accident 
discovered in the synagogue, praying at the feast of Tabernacles, 
but nothing seems to have been done with them. At Medina 
del Campo, in the same year, Fray Alonso was informed that 
there were more than a hundred who denied the truth of the 
New Testament, but he could do nothing save preach against 
them, and subsequently he learned that in one house there were 
more than thirty men, at that very time, laid up in consequence 
of undergoing circumcision. It is no wonder that he earnestly 
advocated the introduction of the Inquisition as the only cure 
for this scandalous condition of affairs, that he argued in its 
favor with the warmest zeal and answered all objections in a 
manner which showed that he was familiar with its workings 
from a careful study of the Clementines and of Eymeric’s Direc- 
torium.* 

The good Cura de los Palacios is equally emphatic in his 
testimony as to the prevalence of Judaism among the Conversos. 
For the most part, he says, they continued to be Jews, or rather 
they were neither Christians nor Jews but heretics, and this 
heresy increased and flourished through the riches and pride of 
many wise and learned men, bishops and canons and friars and 
abbots and financial agents and secretaries of the king and of 
the magnates. At the commencement of the reign of Ferdinand 
and Isabella this heresy grew so powerful that the clerks were 
on the point of preaching the law of Moses. These heretics 
avoided baptizing their children and, when they could not 
prevent it, they washed off the baptism on returning from the 
church; they ate meat on fast days and unleavened bread at 


1 Fortalicium Fidei, fol. liii-liv, Ixxv—vi, clxxvili-ix, 


152 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boor I 


Passover, which they observed as well as the Sabbaths; they 
had Jews who secretly preached in their houses and rabbis who 
slaughtered meat’ and birds for them; they performed all the 
Jewish ceremonies in secret as well as they could and avoided, 
as far as possible, receiving the sacrament; they never confessed 
truly—a confessor, after hearing one of them, cut off a corner of 
his garment saying ‘‘Since you have never sinned I want a piece 
of your clothes as a relic to cure the sick.”’ Many of them attained 
to great wealth, for they had no conscience in usury, saying that 
they were spoiling the Egyptians. They assumed airs of superi- 
ority, asserting that there was no better race on earth, nor wiser, 
nor shrewder, nor more honorable through their descent from 
the tribes of Israel.’ 

In fact, when we consider the popular detestation of the 
Conversos and the invitation to attack afforded by their Judaizing 
tendencies, the postponement in establishing the Inquisition is 
attributable to the all-pervading lawlessness of the period and 
the absence of a strong central power. The people gratified their 
hatred by an occasional massacre, with its accompanying pillage, 
but among the various factions of the distracted state no one was 
strong enough to attempt a systematic movement provoking the 
bitterest opposition of a powerful class whose members occupied 
confidential positions in the court not alone of the king but of 
every noble and prelate. Earnest and untiring as was Fray 
Alonso’s zeal it therefore was fruitless. In August, 1461, he 
induced the heads of the Observantine Franciscans to address 
the chapter of the Geronimites urging a union of both bodies in 
the effort to obtain the introduction of the Inquisition. The 
suggestion was favorably received but the answer was delayed, 
and the impatient Fray Alonso, with Fray Fernando de la Plaza 
and other Observantines, appealed directly to King Henry, 
representing the prevalence of the Judaizing heresy throughout 
the land and the habitual circumcision of the children of Con- 
versos.* The zeal of Fray Fernando outran his discretion and 
in his sermons he declared that he possessed the foreskins of 


1 Bernaldez, Historia de los Reyes Catdélicos, cap. xliii. See also Péramo de 
Orig. Officii S. Inquisit., p. 134. 

Bernaldez evidently derives his details from the inquisitorial sentences read at 
the autos de fe, in which these evidences of Judaism are recited in endless repeti- 
tion. 

2 Amador de los Rios, III, 142. 


Cuar. IV] COMMENCEMENT OF PERSECUTION 153 


children thus treated. King Henry sent for him and said that 
this practice was a gross insult to the Church, which it was his 
duty to punish, ordering him to produce the objects and reveal 
the names of the culprits. The fraile could only reply that he 
had heard it from persons of repute and authority, but, on being 
commanded to state their names, refused to do so, thus tacitly 
acknowledging that he had no proof. The Conversos were 
not slow in taking advantage of his blunder and, to crown the 
defeat of the Observantines, the Geronimites changed their views. 
Their general, Fray Alonso de Oropesa, who himself had Jewish 
blood in his veins, was a man deservedly esteemed; under his 
impulsion they mounted the pulpit in defence of the Conversos 
and the Observantines for the time were silenced. While the 
labors of the fiery Fray Alonso were unquestionably successful 
in intensifying the bitterness of race hatred, their only direct 
result was seen in the Concordia of Medina del Campo between 
Henry IV and his revolted nobles in 1464-5. In this an elaborate 
clause deplored the spread of the Judaizing heresy; it ordered the 
bishops to establish a searching inquisition throughout all lands 
and lordships, regardless of franchises and privileges, for the 
detection and punishment of the heretics; it pledged the king 
to support the measure in every way and to employ the confis- 
cations in the war with the Moors and it pointed out that the 
enforcement of this plan would put an end to the tumults and 
massacres directed against the suspects.” Under this impulsion 
some desultory persecution occurred. In the trial of Beatriz 
Nufiez, by the Inquisition of Toledo in 1485, witnesses allude to 
her husband, Fernando Gonzalez who, some twenty years before, 
had been convicted and reconeiled.* More detailed is a case 
occurring at Llerena in 1467, where, on September 17th, two Con- 
versos, Garci Ferndindez Valency and Pedro Franco de Villareal, 
were discovered in the act of performing Jewish ceremonies. 
The alcalde mayor, Alvaro de Céspedes, at once seized them and 
carried them before the episcopal vicar, Joan Millan. They 
confessed their Judaism and the vicar at once sentenced them to 
be burnt alive, which was executed the same day; two women 
compromised in the matter were condemned to other penalties 


‘ Castillo, Crénica de Enrique IV, cap. liiii— Mariana Historia de Espafia, Lib, 
XXIII, cap. Vi. 
- 2 Modesto Lafuente, Hist. Gen. de Espafia, IX, 227. 
3 Boletin, XXIII, 300-1. 


154 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


and the house in which the heresy had been perpetrated was torn 
down.’ In such cases the bishops were merely exercising their 
imprescriptible jurisdiction over heresy, but the prelacy of Castile 
was too much occupied with worldly affairs to devote any gen- 
eral or sustained energy to the suppression of Judaizers, and 
the land was too anarchical for the royal power to exert any 
influence in carrying the Concordia into effect; the Deposition of 
Avila, which followed in the next year, plunged everything again 
into confusion and the only real importance of the attempt lies 
in its significance of what was impending when peace and a strong 
government should render such a measure feasible. Yet it is a 
noteworthy fact that, in all the long series of the Cértes of Cas- 
tile, from the earliest times, the proceedings of which have been 
published in full, there was no petition for anything approach- 
ing an Inquisition. In the fourteenth century there were many 
complaints about the Jews and petitions for restrictive laws, but 
these diminish in the fifteenth century and the later Cortes, from 
1450 on, are almost free from them. The fearful disorders of the 
land gave the procurators or deputies enough to complain about. 
and they seem to have had no time to waste on problematical 
dangers to religion.’ 


This was the situation at the accession of Ferdinand and 
Isabella in 1474. Some years were necessary to settle the ques- 
tion of the succession, disputed by the unfortunate Beltraneja, 
and to quell the unruly nobles. During this period Sixtus IV 
renewed the attempt to introduce the papal Inquisition, for, in 
sending Nicolé Franco to Castile as legate, he commissioned him 
with full inquisitorial faculties to prosecute and punish the false 
Christians who after baptism persisted in the observance of Jew-. 
ish rites.* The effort, however, was fruitless and is interesting 
chiefly from the evidence which it gives of the desire of Sixtus 
to give to Castile the blessing of the Inquisition. Ferdinand 
and Isabella, as we have seen, were habitually jealous of papal 
encroachments and were anxious to limit rather than to extend 
the legatine functions; they did not respond to the papal zeal 
for the purity of the faith and even when quiet was to a great 


‘ Vicente Barrantes, Aparato para la Historia de Extremadura, II, 362. 

? Cértes de los Antiguos Reinos de Leon y de Castilla, Madrid, 1861 sqq. 

* Archivio Vaticano. Sisto IV, Registro 679, Tom. I, fol. 52. I have printed 
this bull in the American Historical Review, I, 46. 


Cuap. IV PRELIMINARY MOVEMENTS 155. 


extent restored they took no initiative with regard to a matter’ 
which had seemed to Fray Alonso de Espina so immeasurably 
important. In his capacity of agitator he had been succeeded 
by Fray Alonso de Hojeda, prior of the Dominican house of San 
Pablo of Seville, who devoted himself to the destruction of 
Judaism, both open as professed by the Jews and concealed 
as attributed to the Conversos. The battle of Toro, March 1, 
1476, virtually broke up the party of the Beltraneja, of which 
the leaders made their peace as best they could, and the sover-' 
elgns could at last undertake the task of pacifying the land. At 
the end of July, 1477, Isabella, after capturing the castle of Tru- 
gillo, came, as we have seen, to Seville where she remained until’ 
October, 1478.1 The presence of the court, with Conversos filling 
many of its most important posts, excited Fray Alonso to greater: 
ardor than ever. It was in vain, however, that he called the: 
queen’s attention to the danger threatening the faith and the State 
from the multitude of pretended Christians in high places. She 
was receiving faithful service from members of the class accused 
and she probably was too much occupied with the business in 
hand to undertake a task that could be postponed. It is said 
that her confessor, Torquemada, at an earlier period, had induced 
her to take a vow that, when she should reach the throne, she 
would devote her life to the extirpation of heresy and the suprem- 
acy of the Catholic faith, but this may safely be dismissed as a 
legend of later date.?. Be this as it may, all that was done at the 
moment was that- Pero Gonzalez de Mendoza, then Archbishop 
of Seville, held a synod in which was promulgated a catechism 
setting forth the belief and duties of the Christian, which was 
published in the churches and hung up for public information in 
every parish, while the priests were exhorted to increased vigi- 
lance and the frailes to fresh zeal in making converts.* The 


1 It was during Isabella’s stay in Seville that, on September 2d, she confirmed, 
followed by Ferdinand at Xeres, October 18, 1477, a forged decree, ascribed to 
Frederic II, granting certain privileges to the Inquisition of Sicily. This was 
done at the request of Filippo de’ Barbarj, subsequently Inquisitor of Sicily, then 
at the court, whom both monarchs qualify as their confessor. He is said to have 
exercised considerable influence with them in overcoming the opposition to the 
establishment of the Inquisition in Castile. With regard to the forged decree of 
Frederic II, see the author’s “History of the Inquisition of the Middle Ages,” 
Vol. II, p. 288. 

* Zurita, Afiales de Aragon, Lib. xx, cap. xlix. 

§ Pulgar, Chronica, P. 1, cap. Ixxvii.—Bernaldez, cap. xliii—Medina, Vida, 
del Cardenal Mendoza (Memorial hist. espafiol, VI, 235). 


156 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


adoption of such a device betrays the previous neglect of all 
instruction of the Marranos in the new religion imposed on them. 

The court left Seville and Hojeda’s opportunity seemed to 
have passed away. Whatever alacrity the priests may have 
shown in obeying their archbishop, nothing was accomplished 
nor was the increased zeal of the frailes rewarded with success. 
There is a story accredited by all historians of the Inquisition 
that Hojeda chanced to hear of a meeting of Jews and Conversos 
on the night of Good Friday, March 28, 1478, to celebrate their 
impious rites and that he hastened with the evidence to Cordova 
and laid it before the sovereigns, resulting in the punishment 
of the culprits and turning the scale in favor of introducing the 
Inquisition, but there is no contemporary evidence of its truth 
and the dates are irreconcilable, nor was such an incentive 
necessary.’ The insincerity of the conversion of a large portion 
of the Marranos was incontestable; according to the principles 
universally accepted at the period it was the duty of the sov- 
ereigns to reduce them to conformity; with the pacification of 
the land the time had come to attempt this resolutely and com- 
prehensively and the only question was as to the method. 

It was inevitable that there should have been a prolonged strug- 
gle in the court before the drastic remedy of the Inquisition was 
adopted. The efforts of its advocates were directed, not against 
the despised and friendless Jews, but against the powerful Con- 
versos, embracing many of the most trusted counsellors of the 
sovereigns and men high in station in the Church, who could 
not but recognize the danger impending on all who traced their 
descent from Israel. There seems at first to have been a kind 
of compromise adopted, under which Pedro Fernandez de Solis, 
Bishop of Cadiz, who was Provisor of Seville, with the Assistente 
Diego de Merlo, Fray Alfonso de Hojeda and some other frailes 
were commissioned to take charge of the matter, with power to 
inflict punishment. This resulted in a report by the commis- 
sioners to the sovereigns that a great portion of the citizens of 
Seville were infected with heresy, that it involved men high in 
station and power, and that it spread throughout not only Anda- 
lusia but Castile, so that it was incurable save by the organiza- 


1 P4ramo de Orig. Offic. S. Inquis. p. 134. 
Padre Fidel Fita has pointed out the discrepancy in the dates.—Boletin, XVI, 
559, 


 Cuar. IV] THE INQUISITION APPLIED FOR 157 


tion of the Inquisition.» The Archbishop Mendoza, doubtless 
disgusted with the failure of his methods of instruction, joined 
in these representations and they had a powerful supporter in 
Fray Thomas de Torquemada, prior of the Dominican convent 
of Santa Cruz in Segovia, who, as confessor of the sovereigns, 
had much influence over them and who had long been urging 
the vigorous chastisement of heresy.” At last the victory was 
won. Ferdinand and Isabella resolved to introduce the Inqui- 
sition in the Castilian kingdoms and their ambassadors to the 
Holy See, the Bishop of Osma and his brother Diego de Santillan, 
were ordered to procure the necessary bull from Sixtus IV.® 
This must have been shrouded in profound secrecy, for, in July, 
1478, while negotiations must have been on foot in Rome, Fer- 
dinand and Isabella convoked a national synod at Seville which 
sat until August Ist. In the propositions laid by the sovereigns 
before this body there is no hint that such a measure was desired 
or proposed and, in the deliberations of the assembled prelates, 
there is no indication that the Church thought any action against 
the Conversos necessary.* Even as late as 1480, after the pro- 
curement of the bull and before its enforcement, the Cértes of 
Toledo presented to the sovereigns a detailed memorial embody- 
ing all the measures of reform desired by the people. In this 
the separation of Christians from Jews and Moors is asked for, 
but there is no request for the prosecution of apostate Conversos.° 
Evidently there was no knowledge of and no popular demand 
for the impending Inquisition. 

Sixtus can have been nothing loath to accomplish the intro- 
duction of the Inquisition in Castile, which his predecessors had 
so frequently and so vainly attempted and which he had essayed 
to do a few years previous by granting the necessary faculties 
to his legate. If the request of the Castilian sovereigns, there- 
fore, was not immediately granted it cannot have been from 
humanitarian motives as alleged by some modern apologists, 


1 Bernaldez, Historia de los Reyes Catélicos, cap. xliii. 

? Péramo, p. 135.—-Medina, Vida del Cardenal Mendoza (Memorial histérico 
espafiol, VI, 235). 

3 Pulgar, Crénica, P. 11, cap. clxxviii—Pulgar (cap. iv) gives sole credit to 
Isabella for the extirpation of heresy. 

* The proceedings of this important assembly have been printed by Padre 
Fidel Fita (Boletin, XXII, 212-250). 

5 Printed by Dom Clemencin, Elogio de Dofia Isabel, pp. 595-7. 


158 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


but because Ferdinand and Isabella desired, not the ordinary 
papal Inquisition, but one which should be under the royal con- 
trol and should pour into the royal treasury the resultant con- 
fisecations. Hitherto the appointment of inquisitors had always 
been made by the Provincials of the Dominican or Franciscan 
Orders according as the territory belonged to one or to the other, 
with occasional interference on the part of the Holy See, from 
which the commissions emanated. It was a delegation of the 
supreme papal authority and had always been held completely 
independent of the secular power, but Ferdinand and Isabella 
were too jealous of papal interference in the internal affairs of 
their kingdoms to permit this, and it is an evidence of the 
extreme desire of Sixtus to extend the Inquisition over Castile 
that he consented to make so important a concession. There 
also was doubtless discussion over the confiscations which the 
wealth of the Conversos promised to render large. This was’ 
a matter in which there was no universally recognized prac- 
tice. In France they enured to the tempordl seigneur. In Italy 
the custom varied at different times and in the various states, 
but the papacy assumed to control it and, in the fourteenth cen-' 
tury, it claimed the whole, to be divided equally between the 
Inquisition and the papal camera.*’ The matter was evidently 
one to be determined by negotiation, and in this too the sov- 
erelgns had their way, for the confiscations were tacitly aban- 
doned to them. Nothing was said as to defraying the expenses: 
of the institution, but this was inferred by the absorption of 
the confiscations. If it was to be dependent on the crown the 
crown must provide for it, and we shall see hereafter the various’ 
devices by which a portion of the burden was subsequently 
thrown upon the Church. 

The bull as finally issued bears date November 1, 1478, and 
is a very simple affair which, on its face, bears no signs of its 
momentous influence in moulding the destinies of the Spanish 
Peninsula. After reciting the existence in Spain of false Chris- 
tians and the request of Ferdinand and Isabella that the pope 
should provide a remedy, it authorizes them to appoint three 
bishops or other suitable men, priests either regular or secular, 
over forty years of age, masters or bachelors in theology or 
doctors or licentiates of canon law, and to remove and replace 


1 Fortalicium Fidei, Lib. 1, consid. xi—History of the Inquisition of the 
Middle Ages, I, 512-13. 


Cuap. IV] NATURE OF THE PAPAL BULL 159 


them at pleasure. These are to have the jurisdiction and facul- 
ties of bishops and inquisitors over heretics, their fautors and 
receivers.. Subsequently Sixtus pronounced the bull to have 
been drawn inconsiderately and not in accordance with received 
practice and the decrees of his predecessors, which doubtless 
referred to the power of appointment and removal lodged in 
the crown and also to the omission of the requirement of epis- 
copal concurrence in rendering judgment.? The creation of 
inquisitors was in itself an invasion of episcopal jurisdiction, 
which, from the earliest history of the institution, had been the 
source of frequent trouble, and where, as in Spain, many bishops 
were of Jewish blood and therefore under suspicion, the question 
was more intricate than elsewhere. With respect to this, more- 
over, it is observable that the bull did not confer, like that of 
Nicholas V, in 1451, jurisdiction over bishops in any special 
derogation of the decree of Boniface VIII requiring them, when 
suspected of heresy, to be tried by the pope.? Both of these 


1 This bull is embodied in the first proclamation of the inquisitors, Seville, 
January 2, 1481, printed by Padre Fita (Boletin, XV, 449-52). It had previously 
been looked upon as lost. Its main provisions, however, are embodied in the 
cédula of Dec. 27, 1480, printed in the notes to the Novisima Recopilacion, Ed. 
1805, Tom. I, p. 260. - 

It is a little singular that the Inquisition possessed very few documents relating 
to its early history. In an elaborate consulta of July 18, 1703, presented to 
Philip V on the affair of Fray Froilan Diaz, the Suprema states that it had had 
all the records searched with little result; many important papers had been sent 
to Aragon and Catalonia and had never been returned; the rest were in a chest 
delivered to the Count of Villalonga, secretary of Philip III, to arrange and 
classify and on his arrest and the sequestration of his effects they disappeared. 
—Biblioteca Nacional, Seccion de MSS., G, 61, fol. 198. 

It is quite possible that the contents of the chest form the “ Bulario de la 
Inquisicion perteneciente 4 la Orden de Santiago,”’ consisting of eight Libros, or 
folio volumes (five of originals and three of copies) now in the Archivo Histérico 
Nacional. It is from this collection that Padre Fita has printed the proclamation 
above alluded to and many other important documents, and it will be seen that 
I have made large use of it under the name of “ Bulario de la Orden de Santiago.”’ 
There are also vast stores of records in the Archivo Histérico Nacional of Madrid, 
in the archives of Simancas and Barcelona, and some in the Vatican Library. 
Llorente burnt many papers before leaving Madrid and carried others to Paris, 
some of which are in the Bibliothéque Nationale, fonds espagnol. The Biblioteca 
Nacional of Madrid also has a large number and others are dispersed through 
the various libraries of Europe or are in private hands. 

2 See his brief of January 29, 1482, printed by Llorente, Historia Critica, 
Append. n. 1. 

3 History of the Inquisition of the Middle Ages, I, 331. 


160 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


questions, as we shall see, subsequently gave rise to considerable 
discussion. 

So far the anti-Semitic party had triumphed, but Isabella’s 
hesitation to exercise the powers thus obtained shows that the 
Conversos in her court did not abandon the struggle and that 
for nearly two years they succeeded in keeping the balance even. 
It is possible also that Ferdinand was not inclined to a severity 
of which he could forecast the economical disadvantages, for 
as late as January, 1482, a letter from him to the inquisitors of 
his kingdom of Valencia manifests a marked preference for the 
use of mild and merciful methods. Whatever may have been 
the influences at work, it was not until September 17, 1480, 
that the momentous step was taken which was to exercise so 
sinister an influence on the destinies of Spain. On that day 
commissions were issued to two Dominicans, Miguel de Morillo, 
master of theology, and Juan de San Martin, bachelor of theology 
and friar of San Pablo in Seville, who were emphatically told 
that any dereliction of duty would entail ‘their removal, with 
forfeiture of all their temporalities and denationalization in the 
kingdom, thus impressing upon them their subordination to 
the crown. Still there were delays. October 9th a royal order 
commanded all officials to give them free transportation and 
provisions on their way to Seville, where, as in the most infected 
spot, operations were to commence. When they reached the 
city they waited on the chapter and presented their creden- 
tials; the municipal council met them at the chapter-house 
door and escorted them to the city hall, where a formal re- 
ception took place and a solemn procession was organized for 
the following Sunday. They were thus fairly installed but 
apparently they still found difficulties thrown in their way for, 
on December 27, it was deemed necessary to issue a royal 
cédula to the officials ordering them to render all aid to the 
inquisitors.” 

They had not waited for this to organize their tribunal, with 
Doctor Juan Ruiz de Medina as assessor and Juan Lopez del 
Barco, a chaplain of the queen, as promotor fiscal or prosecuting 
officer. To these were added, May 13, 1481, Diego de Merlo, 


1 Archivo General de la Corona de Aragon, Reg. 3684, fol. 1. See Appendix. 
? Fidel Fita, Boletin, XVI, 452.—Llorente, Hist. Crft. cap. v, art. ii—Relacion 
histérica de la Juderfa de Sevilla, p. 22 (Sevilla, 1849). 


Cuap. IV] COMMENCEMENT AT SEVILLE 161 


assistente or corregidor of Seville, and the Licentiate Ferrand 
Yaniez de Lobon as receivers of confiscations—an indispensable 
office in view of the profits of persecution. All soon found plenty 
of work. The Conversos of Seville had not been unmindful of 
the coming tempest. Many of them had fled to the lands. 
of the neighboring nobles, in the expectation that feudal 
jurisdictions would protect them, even against a spiritual court: 
such as that of the Inquisition. To prevent this change 
of domicile a royal decree ordered that no one should leave any 
place where inquisitors were holding their tribunal, but in the 
general terror this arbitrary command received scant obedience. 
A more efficient step was a proclamation addressed, on January 
2, 1481, to the Marquis of Cadiz and other nobles by the frailes: 
Miguel and Juan. This proved that no error had been made in: 
the selection of those who were to lay the foundations of the 
Inquisition and that a new era had opened for Spain. The two 
simple friars spoke with an assured audacity to grandees who 
had been wont to treat with their sovereigns on almost equal 
terms—an audacity which must have appeared incredible to 
those to whom it was addressed, but to which Spain in time 
became accustomed from the Holy Office. The great Rodrigo: 
Ponce de Leon and all other nobles were commanded to search. 
their territories, to seize all strangers and newcomers and to 
deliver them within fifteen days at the prison of the Inquisition;. 
to sequestrate their property and confide it, properly inven-- 
toried, to trustworthy persons who should account for it to the: 
king or to the inquisitors. In vigorous language they were told. 
that any failure in obeying these orders would bring upon them. 
excommunication removable only by the inquisitors or their 
superiors, with forfeiture of rank and possessions and the release 
of their vassals from allegiance and from all payments due—a. 
release which the inquisitors assumed to grant in advance, add-- 
ing that they would prosecute them as fautors, receivers and. 
defenders of heretics... This portentous utterance was effective: 
the number of prisoners was speedily so great that the convent: 
of San Pablo, which the inquisitors at first occupied, became 


1 Boletin, XV, 453-7. This was fairly within the rules of the canon law but it. 
did not put an end to the sheltering of fugitives from the Inquisition by nobles: 
who doubtless found it profitable. In.some instructions issued by Torquemada,. 
December 6, 1484, there.is one regulating the relations between such nobles and. 
the receiver of confiscations.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 933. 

11 


162 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


insufficient and they obtained permission to establish them- 
selves in the great fortress of Triana, the stronghold of Seville, 
of which the immense size and the gloomy dungeons rendered 
it appropriate for the work in hand.’ 

There were other Conversos, however, who imagined that 
resistance was preferable to flight. Diego de Susan, one of the 
leading citizens of Seville, whose wealth was estimated at ten 
millions of maravedis, assembled some of his prominent brethren 
of Seville, Utrera and Carmona to deliberate as to their action. 
The meeting was held in the church of San Salvador and com- 
prised ecclesiastics of high rank, magistrates and officials belong- 
ing to the threatened class. Civic tumults had been so customary 
a resource, when any object was to be gained, that Susan naturally 
suggested, in a fiery speech, that they should recruit faithful. 
men, collect a store of arms, and that the first arrest by the 
inquisitors should be the signal of a rising in which the inquisi- 
tors should be slain and thus an emphatic warning be given to 
deter others from renewing the attempt. In spite of some faint- 
heartedness manifested by one or two of those present, the plan 
was adopted and steps were taken to carry it out. When Pedro 
Fernandez Venedera, mayordomo of the cathedral, one of the 
conspirators, was arrested, weapons to arm a hundred men 
were found in his house, showing how active were the prepara- 
tions on foot. The plot would doubtless have been executed 
and have led to a massacre, such as we have so often seen in the 
Spanish cities, but for a daughter of Diego Susan, whose loveli- 
ness had won for her: the name of the Fermosa Fembra. She was 
involved in an intrigue with a Christian caballero, to whom she 


1 Bernaldez, cap. xliv. The castle of Triana continued to be the seat of the 
Inquisition of Seville until 1626, when it was threatened with ruin by the inunda- 
tions of the Guadalquivir, and the tribunal was removed to the palace of the 
Caballeros Tellos Taveros in the Colacion de San Marcos. In 1639 it returned 
to the castle, which had been repaired and it remained there until 1789, when the 
continual encroachment of the river caused its transfer to the Colegio known as 
las Becas.—Varflora, Compendio histérico-descriptivo de Sevilla, P. 1, Co 1 
(Sevilla, 1789).—Zufiiga, Annales de Sevilla, afio 1693, n. 1. 

The Counts of San Lucar were hereditary alcaides of Triana; in return for sur- 
rendering the castle they received the office of alguazil mayor ee the Inquisition, 
which continued to be held by their representatives the Marquises of Leganes— 
a bargain which was ratified by Philip IV, November 8, 1634. In 1707 the office 
was valued at 150,000 maravedis a year, out of which the holder provided a 
deputy.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Legajo 1465, fol. 105. | 


Cuap. IV] THE FIRST AUTO DE FE 163 


revealed the secret and it was speedily conveyed to the inquisi- 
tors." 

Nothing could better have suited their purpose. If there 
had been any feeling of opposition to them on the part of the 
authorities it disappeared and the most important members of 
the Converso community were in their power. Diego de Merlo, 
the assistente of Seville, arrested at the bidding of the inquisitors 
the richest and most honorable Conversos, magistrates and 
dignitaries, who were confined in San Pablo and thence trans- 
ferred to the castle of Triana. The trials were prompt and at 
the rendering of sentence a consulta de je or assembly of experts 
was convoked, consisting of lawyers and the provisor of the 
bishopric, thus recognizing the necessity of concurrent action 
on the part of the episcopal jurisdiction. What justified the 
sentence of burning it would be difficult to say. It was not 
obstinate heresy for one at least of the victims is stated to have 
died as a good Christian; it could not have been the plot, for 
this, in so far as it was an ecclesiastical offence, was merely 
impeding the Inquisition, and even the assassins of St. Peter 
Martyr, when they professed repentance, were admitted to 
penance. It was a new departure, in disregard of all the canons, 
and it gave warning that the New Inquisition of Spain was not 
to follow in the footsteps of the Old, but was to mark out for 
itself a yet bloodier and more terrible career? 

Justice was prompt and the first auto de fe was celebrated 
February 6, 1481, when six men and women were burnt and the 
sermon was preached by Fray Alonso de Hojeda, who now saw 


1 Amador de los Rios, III, 247-8.—Bernaldez, cap. xliii—F idel Fita, Boletin, 
XVI, 450 sqq., 557 sqq. 

As the parricide committed by the Fermosa Fembra entailed poverty and dis- 
grace on her, through the confiscation of her father’s property and the disabilities 
inflicted on his descendants, the Church interested itself in her fate. Rainaldo 
Romero, Bishop of Tiberias, secured for her entrance into a convent, but it can 
readily be understood that life there was not rendered pleasant to her and she 
quitted it, without taking the vows, to follow a career of shame. Her beauty dis- 
appeared and she died in want, leaving directions that her skull should be placed 
as a warning over the door of the house which had been the scene of her dis- 
orderly life. Her wishes were obeyed and it is still to be seen in the Calle del 
Artaud, near its entrance, hard by the Alcdzar.—Amador de los Rios, III, 249. 

2 Bernaldez, cap. xliv. Rodrigo tells us (Hist. verdadera de la Inquisicion, 
II, 74-6) that only five were burnt who refused all offers of reconciliation and 
‘were impenitent to the last, but the contemporary Bernaldez says that Diego 
de Susan died as a good Christian in the second auto. 


164 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


the efforts of so many years crowned with success. He might 
well say nunc demittis, for though a second auto followed in a 
few days his eyes were not to rejoice at the holy spectacle, for 
the pestilence which was to carry off fifteen thousand of the 
people of Seville was now commencing and he was one of the 
earliest victims. In the second auto there were only three burn- 
ings, Diego de Susan, Manuel Sauli and Bartolomé de Torralba, 
three of the wealthiest and most important citizens of Seville. 
As though to show that the work thus begun was to be an 
enduring one, a quemadero, brasero, or burning-place was con- 
structed in the Campo de Tablada, so massively that its founda- 
tions can still be traced. On four pillars at the corners were 
erected statues of the prophets in plaster-of-Paris, apparently 
to indicate that, although technically the burning was the work 
of secular justice, it was performed at the command of religion.’ 

Further arrests and burnings'promptly followed, the wealth 
and prominence of the victims proving that here was a tribunal 
which was no respecter of persons and that money or favor 
could avail nothing against its rigid fanaticism. The flight 
of the terror-stricken Conversos was stimulated afresh, but the 
Inquisition was not thus to be balked of its prey; flight was for- 
bidden and guards were placed at the gates, where so many 
were arrested that no place of confinement sufficiently capacious 
for them could be found, yet notwithstanding this great num- 
bers escaped to the lands of the nobles, to Portugal and to the 
Moors. The plague now began to rage with violence, God and 
man seemed to be uniting for the destruction of the unhappy 
Conversos, and they petitioned Diego de Merlo to allow them to 
save their lives by leaving the pest-ridden city. The request 
was humanely granted to those who could procure passes, on 
condition that they should leave their property behind and only 
take with them what was necessary for immediate use. Under 
these regulations multitudes departed, more than eight thou- 


1 Bernaldez, cap. xliv—Amador de los Rios, III, 250. — Field’s Old Spain 
and New Spain, p. 279. 

The remark of the good Cura de los Palacios in describing the quemadero is 
“en que los quemaban y fasta que haya heregfa los quemardn.”’ The cost of the 
four statues was defrayed by a gentleman named Mesa, whose zeal won for him 
the position of familiar of the Holy Office and receiver of confiscations. He was, 
however, discovered to be a Judaizer and was himself burnt on the quemadero 
which he had adorned.—Rodrigo, II, 79-80. 


Cuap. IV] THE TERM OF GRACE 165 


sand finding refuge at Mairena, Marchena and Palacios. The 
Marquis of Cadiz, the Duke of Medina Sidonia and other nobles 
received them hospitably, but many kept on to Portugal or to 
the Moors and some, we are told, even found refuge in Rome. 
The inquisitors themselves were obliged to abandon the city, 
but their zeal allowed of no respite; they removed their tribunal 
to Aracena, where they found ample work to do, burning there 
twenty-three men and women, besides the corpses and bones of 
numerous deceased heretics, exhumed for the purpose. When 
the pestilence diminished they returned to Seville and resumed 
their work there with unrelaxing ardor According to a con- 
temporary, by the fourth of November they had burnt two hun- 
dred and ninety-eight persons and had condemned seventy-nine 
to perpetual prison. 

As novices, it would seem that the zeal of the inquisitors had 
plunged them into the business of arresting and trying suspects 
without resorting to the preliminary device, which had been 
found useful in the earliest operations of the Holy Office—the 
Term of Grace. This was a period, longer or shorter according 
to the discretion of the inquisitors, during which those who felt 
themselves guilty could come forward and confess, when they 
would be reconciled to the Church and subjected to penance, 
pecuniary and otherwise, severe enough, but preferable to the 
stake. One of the conditions was that of stating all that they 
knew of other heretics and apostates, which proved an exceed- 
ingly fruitful source of information as, under the general terror, 
there was little hesitation in denouncing not only friends and 
acquaintances, but the nearest and dearest kindred—parents 
and children and brothers and sisters. No better means of 
detecting the hidden ramifications of Judaism could be devised 
and, towards the middle of the year 1481, the inquisitors adopted 
it.2 The mercy thus promised was scanty, as we shall see here- 
after when we come to consider the subject, but it brought in 
vast numbers and autos de fe were organized in which they were 
paraded as penitents, no less than fifteen hundred being ex- 
hibited in one of these solemnities. It can readily be conceived 
how soon the inquisitors were in possession of information in- 


1 Bernaldez, cap. xliv. 2 Llorente, Afiales de la Inquisicion, I, 44. 

8 Amador de los Rios, III, 252. Rodrigo (Hist. Verdad. II, 76) states that the 
first act of the inquisitors was the issue of the proclamation of the Term of Grace 
on January 2d, but this is scarce consistent with the narrative of Bernaldez. 


166 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


culpating Conversos in every corner of the land. It was freely 
asserted that they were all in reality Jews, who were waiting 
for God to lead them out of the worse than Egyptian bondage 
in which they were held by the Christians... Thus was demon- 
strated not only the necessity of the Inquisition but of its exten- 
sion throughout Spain. The evil was too great and its imme- 
diate repression too important for the work to be entrusted to 
the two friars laboring so zealously in Seville. Permission had 
been obtained only for the appointment of three and application 
was made to Sixtus IV for additional powers. On this occasion 
he did not as before allow the commissions to be granted in the 
name of the sovereigns but issued them direct to those nominated 
to him by them, whereby the inquisitors held their faculties 
immediately from the Holy See. Thus by a brief of February 
11, 1482, he commissioned seven—Pedro Ocafio, Pedro Martinez 
de Barrio, Alfonso de San Cebriano, Rodrigo Segarra, Thomas 
de Torquemada and Bernardo Santa Maria, all . Dominicans.’ 
Still more were required, of whose appointments we have no 
definite knowledge, to man the tribunals which were speedily 
formed at Ciudad-Real, Cordova, Jaen, and possibly at Segovia.’ 

The one at Ciudad-Real was intended for the great archi- 
episcopal province of Toledo, to which city it was transferred 
in 1485. The reason why it was first established at the former 
place may perhaps be that the warlike Archbishop Alonso Car- 


1 Bernaldez, cap. xliv. 2 Pdramo, p. 136.—Boletin, XV, 462. 
It is very questionable whether a tribunal was established at Segovia thus 
early. Colmenares (Hist. de Segovia, cap. xxxiv, ¢ 18) asserts it positively, but 
the only tribunals represented in the assembly of organization, held in Novem- 
ber, 1484, were Seville, Cérdova, Jaen and Ciudad-Real. There was at first some 
resistance at Segovia on the part of the bishop, Juan Arias Davila, who was of 
Jewish descent.—Bergenroth, Calendar of Spanish State Papers, I, xlv. 

In Ciudad-Real, the earliest inquisitors, in 1483, were the Licentiate Pedro 
Diaz dela Costana and the Doctor Francisco dela Fuente (Archivo hist. nacional, 
Inquisicion de Toledo, Legajo 154, n. 375). Neither of these was a Dominican 
and the latter subsequently became an inquisitor-general and bishop successively 
of Avila and of Cérdova. 

In Cérdova the Inquisition was established in 1482, with four inquisitors—the 
Bachilleres Anton Rtiz de Morales and Alvar Gonzalez de Capillas, Doctor Pedro 
Martinez de Barrio, and Fray Martin Cazo, Guardian of the Franciscan convent. 
The first auto de fe was celebrated in 1483, when one of the victims was the con- 
cubine of the treasurer of the cathedral, Pedro Fernandez de Alcaudete, who 
himself was burnt on February 28, 1484. His servants resisted his arrest and in 
the fray the alguazil of the Inquisition was killed.—Matute y Luquin, Autos de 
Fe de Cérdova, pp. 1-2 (Cérdova, 1839). 


Cuap, IV] CIUDAD-REAL AND TOLEDO | 167 


rillo, whether through zeal for the faith or in order to assert his 
episcopal jurisdiction over heresy and prevent the intrusion of the 
papal inquisitors, had appointed before his death, July 1, 1482, a 
certain Doctor Thomas as inquisitor in Toledo. To what extent 
the latter performed his functions we have no means of knowing, 
the only trace of his activity being the production and incor- 
poration, in the records of subsequent trials by the Inquisition 
of Ciudad-Real, of evidence taken by him.’ Be this as it may the 
Inquisition of Ciudad-Real was not organized until the latter 
half of 1483. It corhmenced by issuing an Edict of Grace for 
thirty days, at. the expiration of which it extended the time 
for another thirty days. Meanwhile it was busily employed, 
throughout October and November, in making a general inquest 
and taking testimony from all who would come forward to give 
evidence. In the resultant trials the names of some of the wit- 
nesses appear with suspicious frequency and the nature of their 
reckless general assertions, without personal knowledge, shows 
how flimsy was much of the evidence on which prosecutions 
were based. That the inquest was thorough and that every one 
who knew anything damaging to a Converso was brought up to 
state it may be assumed from the trial of Sancho de Ciudad in 
which the evidence of no less than thirty-four witnesses was 
recorded, some of them testifying to incidents happening twenty 
years previous. Much of this moreover indicates the careless 
security in which the Conversos had lived and allowed their 
Jewish practices to be known to Christian servants and acquaint- 
ances with whom they were in constant intercourse. The first 
public manifestation of results seems to have been an auto de fe 
held November 16th, in the church of San Pedro, for the recon- 
ciliation of penitents-who had come forward during the Term of 
Grace.” Soon after this the trials of those implicated commenced 
and were prosecuted with such vigor that, on February 6, 1484, 
an auto de fe was held in which four persons were burnt, followed 
on the 23d and 24th of the same month by an imposing solemnity 
involving the concremation of thirty living men and women 


1 “En publica forma e se avia fecho en esta dicha ciudad por el Doctor Thomas, 
juez delegado e inquisidor deputado por el reverendisimo sefior Don Alfonso 
Carrillo, arzobispo que fué deste dicho arzobispado de Toledo.”—Arch. hist. 
nacional, Inq. de Toledo, Legajos 139, n. 145; 143, n. 196. 

2 Ibidem, Legajos 139, n. 145; 154, n. 356, 375. 


168 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


and the bones and effigies of forty who were dead or fugitives.’ 
In its two years of existence the tribunal of Ciudad-Real burnt 
fifty-two obstinate heretics, condemned two hundred and twenty 
fugitives and reconciled one hundred and eighty-three penitents.? 

In 1485 the tribunal of Ciudad-Real was transferred to the 
city of Toledo where the Conversos were very numerous and 
wealthy. They organized a plot to raise a tumult and despatch 
the inquisitors during the procession of Corpus Christi (June 2d) 
but, as in the case of Seville, it was betrayed and six of the con- 
spirators were hanged, after which we hear of no further trouble 
there. Those who were first arrested confessed that the design 
extended to seizing the city gates and cathedral tower and hold- 
ing the place against the sovereigns.’ 

The inquisitor, Pedro Diaz, had preached the first sermon on 
May 24th, and, after the defeat of the conspiracy, the tribunal 
entered vigorously on its functions. The customary Term of 
Grace of forty days was proclaimed and after some delay we 
are told that many applied for reconciliation rather through 
fear of concremation than through good will. After the expira- 
tion of the forty days, letters of excommunication were published 
against all cognizant of heresy who should not denounce it within 
sixty days—a term subsequently extended by thirty more. 
Another very effectual expedient was adopted by summoning 
the Jewish rabbis and requiring them, under penalty of life and 
property, to place a major excommunication on their syna- 
gogues and not remove it until all the members should have 
revealed everything within their knowledge respecting Judaizing 
Christians. This was only perfecting a device that had already 
been employed elsewhere. In 1484, by a cédula of December 
10th, Ferdinand had ordered the magistrates of all the principal 
towns in Aragon to compel, by all methods recognized in law, 
the rabbis and sacristans of the synagogues and such other Jews 
as might be named, to tell the truth as to all that might be asked 
of them, and in Seville we are told that a prominent Jew, Judah 
Ibn-Verga, expatriated himself to avoid compliance with a similar 


1 Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Toledo, Legajo 262. 

2 P4ramo, p. 170.—Padre Fidel Fita has compiled a chronological list of the 
trials at Ciudad-Real preserved in the Archivo Hist. Nacional (Boletin, XI, 311 
sqq.). These are included in the Catdlogo de las Causas contra la Fe seguidas ante 
el Tribunal del Santo Oficio de Toledo, by D. Miguel Gémez del Campillo (Madrid, 
1903). 

$ Relacion de la Inquisicion Toledana (Boletin, XI, 293). 


Cuar. IV] PENITENTS IN TOLEDO 169 


demand. The quality of the evidence obtained by such means 
may be estimated from the fact that when, in the assembly 
of Valladolid, in 1488, Ferdinand and Isabella investigated the 
affairs of the Inquisition, it was found that many Jews testified 
falsely against Conversos in order to encompass their ruin, for 
which some of those against which this was proved were lapidated 
in Toledo. Whether true or false, the Toledan Inquisition reaped 
by these methods a plentiful harvest of important revelations. 
It is easy, in fact, to imagine the terror pervading the Converso 
community and the eagerness with which the unfortunates 
would come forward to denounce themselves and their kindred 
and friends, especially when, after the expiration of the ninety 
days, arrests began and quickly followed each other. 

The penitents were allowed to accumulate and at the first 
auto de fe, held February 12, 1486, only those of seven parishes 
—San Vicente, San Nicolas, San Juan de la leche, Santa Yusta, 
San Miguel, San Yuste, and San Lorenzo—were summoned to 
appear. These amounted to seven hundred and fifty of both 
sexes, comprising many of the principal citizens and persons of 
quality. The ceremony was painful and humiliating. Bare- 
headed and barefooted, except that, in consideration of the in- 
tense cold, they were allowed to wear soles, carrying unlighted 
candles and surrounded by a howling mob which had gathered 
from all the country around, they were marched in procession 
through the city to the cathedral, at the portal of which stood 
two priests who marked them on the forehead as they entered 
with the sign of the cross, saying ‘‘ Receive the sign of the cross 
which you have denied and lost.’”’ When inside they were called 
one by one before the inquisitors while a statement of their mis- 
deeds was read. They were fined in one-fifth of all their property 
for the war with the Moors; they were subjected to lifelong 


1 Relacion de la Inquisicion Toledana (Boletin, XI, 293-4).—Arch. Gen. de la 
Corona de Aragon, Reg. 3864, fol. 31—Graetz, Geschichte der Juden, VIII, 323. 
—Pulgar, Crénica, P. 11, cap. 100. 

Legally, Jews were not allowed to testify against Christians and the prohibition 
to receive such evidence was emphatically included in the ferocious bull of 
Nicholas V, in 1447, but, as we shall see, in the Inquisition, all accusing witnesses, 
however infamous, were welcomed. 

How distasteful Ferdinand knew would be the work prescribed to the Aragonese 
magistracy is seen by his imperious command that it must be done—“e por cosa 
del mundo no fagais lo contrario ni recusais de lo facer porque nos seria tan 
molesto que no lo podriamos con paciencia tolerar.”’ 


170 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox IL 


incapacity to hold office or to pursue honorable avocations or 
to wear other than the coarsest vestments unadorned, under 
pain of burning for relapse, and they were required to march in 
procession on six Fridays, bareheaded and barefooted, disci- 
plining themselves with hempen cords.t| The loving mother 
Church could not welcome back to her bosom her erring children 
without a sharp and wholesome warning, nor did she relax her 
vigilance, for this perilous process of confession and reconcilia- 
tion was so devised as to furnish many subsequent victims to 
the stake, as we shall see hereafter. 

The second auto was held on April 2, 1486, where nine hun- 
dred penitents appeared from the parishes of San Roman, San 
Salvador, San Cristéval, San Zoil, Sant Andrés and San Pedro. 
The third auto, on June 11th, consisted of some seven hundred 
and fifty from Santa Olalla, San Tomas, San Martin and Sant 
Antolin. The city being thus disposed of, the various archidia- 
conates of the district were taken in order. That of Toledo 
furnished nine hundred penitents on December 10th, when we 
are told that they suffered greatly from the cold. On January 
15, 1487, there were about seven hundred from the archidia- 
conate of Alcaraz and on March 10th, from those of Talavera, 
Madrid and Guadalajara about twelve hundred, some of whom 
were condemned in addition to wear the sanbenito for life. While 
the more or less voluntary penitents were thus treated there 
were numerous autos de fe celebrated of a more serious charac- 
ter in which there were a good many burnings, including not a 
few frailes and ecclesiastical dignitaries, as well as cases of fugi- 
tives and of the dead, who were burned in effigy and their estates 
confiscated.” 


1 Relacion de la Inquisicion Toledana (Boletin, XI, 295-6). 

In 1629 a well-informed writer tells us that many of those who came forward 
and thus accused themselves were in reality good Christians, who, in the time 
while Jews were yet tolerated, had associated with them in their synagogues and 
weddings and funerals and had bought meat of their butchers. Terrified at the 
proceedings of the Inquisition they came and confessed and were reconciled, 
thus casting an indelible stain on their posterity when the records of the tri- 
bunals were searched and their names were found.—Tratado de los Estatutos 
de Limpieza, cap. 10 (Bibl. Nac. Seccion de MSS. Q, 418). 

2 Relacion (Ibid. pp. 292 sqq., 297, 299, 301-2, 303). 

In the closing years of the fifteenth century and the opening ones of the six- 
teenth there seems to have been a special raid made on Guadalajara. In a list 
of cases of that period I find 965 credited to that place.—Arch. Hist. Nacional, 
Ing. de Toledo, Leg. 262, n. 1. 


Cuap. IV] TRIBUNAL OF GUADALUPE Ban 


In 1485 a temporary tribunal was set up at Guadalupe, where 
Ferdinand and Isabella appointed as inquisitor (under what. 
papal authority does not appear) Fray Nufio de Arevalo, prior 
of the Geronimite convent there. Apparently to guide his inex- 
perience Doctor Francisco de la Fuente was transferred from 
Ciudad-Real and, with another colleague, the Licentiate Pedro 
Sanchez de la Calancha, they purified the place of heresy with 
so much vigor that, within a year, they held in the cemetery 
before the doors of the monastery seven autos de fe in which 
were burnt a heretic monk, fifty-two Judaizers, forty-eight dead 
bodies and twenty-five effigies of fugitives, while sixteen were 
condemned to perpetual imprisonment and innumerable others. 
were sent to the galleys or penanced with the sanbenito for life. 
These energetic proceedings do not appear to have made good 
Christians of those who were spared for, July 13, 1500, Inquisi- 
tor-general Deza ordered all the Conversos of Guadalupe to leave 
the district and not to return.» The same year, 1485, saw 
a tribunal assigned to Valladolid, but it must have met with 
effective resistance, for in September, 1488, Ferdinand and 
Isabella were obliged to visit the city in order to get it into 
working condition; it forthwith commenced operations by 
arresting some prominent citizens and on June 19, 1489, the 
first auto de fe was held in which eighteen persons were burnt. 
alive and the bones of four dead heretics.’ Still, the existence 
of this tribunal would seem to have long remained uncertain for, 
as late as December 24, 1498, we find Isabella writing to a new 
appointee that she and the inquisitor-general have agreed that 
the Inquisition must be placed there and ordering him to pre- 
pare to undertake it, and then on January 22, 1501, telling 
Inquisitor-general Deza that she approves of its lodgement in the: 
house of Diego de la Baeza, where it is to remain for the present; 
she adds that she and Ferdinand have written to the Count of 
Cabra to see that for the future the inquisitors are well treated.* 
Permanent tribunals were also established in Llerena and Murcia, 


1 Péramo, pp. 138--9.—Fidel Fita in Boletin, XXIII, 284 sgqg.—Archivo de 
Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 939, fol. 108. 

2 Toledo, Cronicon de Valladolid (Coleccion de Documentos ineditos, XIII, 
176, 179).—Pulgar, Chron. P. m1, cap. 100. 

* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro I. Unfortunately my copy of this. 
important volume and also of Libro 933 are not folioed. The dates of the docu- 
ments however will sufficiently guide the investigator desirous of verifying the: 
references, 


172 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


of the early records of all of which we know little. In 1490 a 
temporary one was organized in Avila by Torquemada, appar- 
ently for the purpose of trying those accused of the murder of 
the Santo Nifio de la Guardia; it continued active until 1500 
and during these ten years there were hung in the church the 
insignias y mantetas of seventy-five victims burnt alive, of 
twenty-six dead and of one fugitive, besides the sanbenitos of 
seventy-one reconciled penitents.’ 

The various provinces of Castile thus became provided with 
the machinery requisite for the extermination of heresy, and 
at an early period in its development it was seen that, for the 
enormous work before it, some more compact and centralized 
organization was desirable than had hitherto been devised. 
The Inquisition which had been so effective in the thirteenth 
and fourteenth centuries was scattered over Europe; its judges 
were appointed by the Dominican or Franciscan provincials, 
using a course of procedure and obeying instructions which 
emanated from the Holy See. The papacy was the only link 
between them; the individual inquisitors were to a great extent 
independent; they were not subjected to visitation or inspection 
and it was, if not impossible, a matter of difficulty to call them to 
account for the manner in which they might discharge their func- 
tions. Such was not the conception of Ferdinand and Isabella 
who intended the Spanish Inquisition to be a national institution, 
strongly organized and owing obedience to the crown much 
more than to the Holy See. The measures which they adopted 
with this object were conceived with their customary sagacity, 
and were carried out with their usual vigor and success. 

At this period they were earnestly engaged in reorganizing 
the institutions of Castile, centralizing the administration and 
reducing to order the chaos resulting from the virtual anarchy 
of the preceding reigns. In effecting this they apportioned, in 
1480, with the consent of the Cértes of Toledo, the affairs of 
government among four royal councils, that of administration 
and justice, known as the Concejo Real de Castella, that of 


1 A list of these, made in the last century, is printed by Padre Fidel Fita 
(Boletin, XV, 332). It is probably not wholly complete. Of later date than 1500 
there are ten reconciliados—one each in 1509 and 1516 and eight in 1629—sent 
thither by the tribunals in which they were tried. 

Further details as to the organization of the various tribunals will be found in 
the Appendix. 


Cuap. IV] ORGANIZATION 173 


Finance, or Concejo de Hacienda, the Concejo de Estado and 
the Concejo de Aragon, to which was added a special one for 
the Hermandades.* These-met daily in the palace for the de- 
spatch of business and their effect in making the royal power 
felt in every quarter of the land and in giving vigor and unity 
to the management of the state soon proved the practical value 
of the device. The Inquisition was fast looming up as an affair 
of state of the first importance, while yet it could scarce be 
regarded as falling within the scope of either of the four councils; 
the sovereigns were too jealous of papal interference to allow it 
to drift aimlessly, subject to directions from Rome, and their 
uniform policy required that it should be kept as much as pos- 
sible under the royal superintendence. That a fifth council should 
be created for the purpose was a natural expedient, for which 
the assent of Sixtus IV was readily obtained, when it was organ- 
ized in 1483 under the name of the Concejo de la Suprema y Gen- 
eral Inquisicion—a title conveniently abbreviated to la Suprema 
—with jurisdiction over all matters connected with the faith. 
To secure due subordination and discipline over the whole body 
it was requisite that the president of this council should have 
full control of appointment and dismissal of the individual in- 
quisitors who, as exercising power delegated directly from the 
pope, might otherwise regard with contempt the authority of 
one who was also merely a delegate. It thus became necessary 
to create a new office, unknown to the older Inquisition—an 
inquisitor-general who should preside over the deliberations of 
the council. The office evidently was one which would be of 
immense weight and the future of the institution depended 
ereatly on the character of its first chief. By the advice of the 
Cardinal Archbishop of Toledo, Pero Gonzdlez de Mendoza, the 
royal choice fell on Thomas de Torgqemada, the confessor of 
the sovereigns, who was one of the seven inquisitors commissioned 
by the papal letter of February 11, 1482. The other members 
of the council were Alonso Carrillo, Bishop of Mazara (Sicily) 
and two doctors of laws, Sancho Velasco de Cuellar and Ponce 
de Valencia.” The exact date of Torquemada’s appointment is 


‘ Colmenares, Hist. de Segovia, cap. xxxv, 3? 18.—Garibay, Compendio His- 
torial, Lib. xvi, cap. 16. 
. ? Péramo, p. 137.—Llorente, Afiales, I, 73.—Zurita, Afiales, Lib. xx, cap. 
xlix.—Instruciones de Sevilla, 1484, Prélogo (Arguello, fol. 2).—Archivo de 
Alcalé, Estado, Legajo 2843. 

In the conference of Seville in 1484, besides the inquisitors and the members 


174 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox IL 


not known, as the papal brief conferring it has not been found, 
but, as Sixtus created him Inquisitor of Aragon, Catalonia and 
Valencia by letters of October 17, 1483, his commission as 
Inquisitor-general of Castile was somewhat antecedent.’ 

The selection of Torquemada justified the wisdom of the 
sovereigns. Full of pitiless zeal, he developed the nascent 
institution with unwearied assiduity. Rigid and unbending, 
he would listen to no compromise of what he deemed to be his 
duty, and in his sphere he personified the union of the spiritual 
and temporal swords which was the ideal of all true churchmen. 
Under his guidance the Inquisition rapidly took shape and 
extended its organization throughout Spain and was untiring 
and remorseless in the pursuit and punishment of the apostates. 
His labors won him ample praise from successive popes. Already, 
in 1484, Sixtus IV wrote to him that Cardinal Borgia had 
warmly eulogized him for his success in prosecuting the good 
work throughout Castile and Leon, adding ‘‘We have heard 
this with the greatest pleasure and rejoice exceedingly that you, 
who are furnished with both doctrine and authority, have 
directed your zeal to these matters which contribute to the 
praise of God and the utility of the orthodox faith. We commend 
you in the Lord and exhort you, cherished son, to persevere with 
tireless zeal in aiding and promoting the cause of the faith, by 
doing which, as we are assured you will, you will win our special 
favor.’’ Twelve years later, Cardinal Borgia, then pope under 
the name of Alexander VI, assures him in 1496, that he cherishes 
him in the very bowels of affection for his immense labors in the 
exaltation of the faith.” If we cannot wholly attribute to him 


of the Council there are mentioned as present Juan Gutiérrez de Lachaves, and 
Tristan de Medina, whom Llorente (Afiales, I, 74) conjectures to have been 
assistants of Torquemada. . 

1 Folch de Cardona, in the Consulta of the Suprema to Philip V, July 18, 1703, 
states that the earliest bull in the archives was one of Sixtus IV in 1483 appoint- 
ing Torquemada inquisitor-general with power to deputize inquisitors and to 
hear cases in the first instance. It was not till 1486 that Innocent VIII granted 
him appellate jurisdiction.—Bibl. Nacional, Seccion de MSS., G, 61, fol. 199. 

The title of Inquisitor-general was not immediately invented. In a sentence 
pronounced at Ciudad-Real, March 15, 1485, Torquemada is styled simply “ juez 
principal ynquisidor.’’—Arch. Hist. Nac. Inq. de Toledo, Legajo 165, n. 551. 

? Ripoll Bullar. Ord. FF. Preedic. III, 630; IV, 125. Yet modern apologists do 
not hesitate to argue that the papacy sought to mitigate the severity of the 
Spanish Inquisition (Gams, Zur Geschichte der spanischen Staatsinquisition, 


Cuap. IV] TORQUEMADA 175 


the spirit of ruthless fanaticism which animated the Inquisition, 
he at least deserves the credit of stimulating and rendering it 
efficient in its work by organizing it and by directing it with 
dauntless courage against the suspect however high-placed, until 
the shadow of the Holy Office covered the land and no one was 
so hardy as not to tremble at its name. The temper in which 
he discharged his duties and the absolute and irresponsible 
control which he exercised over the subordinate tribunals can 
be fitly estimated from a single instance. There was a fully 
organized Inquisition at Medina, with three inquisitors, an 
assessor, a fiscal- and other officials, assisted by the Abbot of 
Medina as Ordinary. They reconciled some culprits and burnt 
others, apparently without referring the cases to him, but when 
they found reason to acquit some prisoners they deemed it best 
to transmit the papers to him for confirmation. He demurred 
at this mercy and told the tribunal to try the accused again 
when the Licentiate Villalpando should be there as visttador. 
Some months later Villalpando came there, the cases were 
reviewed, the prisoners were tortured, two of them were recon- 
ciled and the rest acquitted, the sentences being duly published 
as final. Torquemada on learning this was incensed and declared 
that he would burn them all. He had them arrested again and 
sent to Valladolid, to be tried outside of their district, where 
his threat was doubtless carried into effect... When such was 
the spirit infused in the organization at the beginning we 
need not wonder that verdicts of acquittal are infrequent in 
the records of its development. Yet withal Torquemada’s zeal 
could not wholly extinguish worldliness. We are told, indeed, 
that he refused the archbishopric of Seville, that he wore the 
humble Dominican habit, that he never tasted flesh nor wore 
linen in his garments or used it on his bed, and that he refused 
to give a marriage-portion to his indigent sister, whom he would 
only assist to enter the order of beatas of St. Dominic. Still, his 
asceticism did not prevent him from living in palaces surrounded 
by a princely retinue of two hundred and fifty armed familiars 
and fifty horesemen.? Nor was his persecuting career purely 


pp. 20-1; Hefele, Der Cardinal Ximenes, p. 269; Pastor, Geschichte der Papste, 
IT, 582), basing their assertions on the eagerness of the curia to entertain appeals, 
of which more hereafter. 

* Archivo de Simancas, Patronato Real, Inquisicion, Legajo tinico, fol. 28. 

2 Péramo, pp. 156-7. 


176 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION —_[Boox I 


disinterested. Though the rule of his Dominican Order forbade 
individual ownership of property and, though his position as 
supreme judge should have dictated the utmost reserve in regard 
to the financial results of persecution, he had no hesitation in 
accumulating large sums from the pecuniary penances inflicted 
by his subordinates on the heretics who spontaneously returned 
to the faith It is true that the standards of the age were so 
low that he made no secret of this and it is also true that he 
lavished them on the splendid monastery of St. Thomas Aquinas 
which he built at Avila, on enlarging that of Santa Cruz at 
Segovia of which he was prior and on various structures in 
his native town of Torquemada. Yet amid the ostentation of 
his expenditure he lived in perpetual fear, and at his table he 
always used the horn of a unicorn which was a sovereign pre- 
servative against poison.’ 

As delegated powers were held to expire with the death of the 
grantor, unless otherwise expressly defined, Torquemada’s com- 
mission required renewal on the decease of Sixtus IV. Ferdinand 
and Isabella asked that the new one should not be limited to 
the life of the pope, but that the power should continue, not only 
during Torquemada’s life, but until the appointment of his 
successor. The request was not granted and, when Innocent 
VIII, by a brief of February 3, 1485, recommissioned Torque- 
mada it was in the ordinary form. This apparently was not 
satisfactory, but the pope was not willing thus to lose all control 
of the Spanish Inquisition and a compromise seems to have been 
reached, for when, February 6, 1486, Torquemada was appointed 
Inquisitor-general of Barcelona and his commission for Spain was 
renewed, on March 24th of ‘the same year, it was drawn to 
continue at the good pleasure of the pope and of the Holy See, 
which, without abnegating papal control, rendered renewals 
unnecessary. This formula was abandoned in the commissions 
of Torquemada’s immediate successors, but was subsequently 


1 Ripoll, IV, 126. 2’ Paéramo, ‘p. 15629 

$ Arch. Gen. de la Corona de Aragon, Reg. 3486, fol. 45.—Pdramo, p. 137. 

4 Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Lib. I de copias, fol. 6, 8—“ad nostrum 
et dicte sedis beneplacitum.,”’ 

The original appointments of Miguel de Morillo and Juan de San Martin were 
similarly ad beneplacitum (Ibid. fol. 10), which may perhaps explain their asser- 
tion of independence of Torquemada. 


Cuap. IV] INTERNAL QUARRELS Dia 


resumed and continued to be employed through the following 
centuries.’ 

Torquemada’s commission of 1485 contained the important 
power of appointing and dismissing inquisitors, but the con- 
firmation of 1486 bore the significant exception that all those 
appointed by the pope were exempted from removal by him, 
indicating that in the interval he had attempted to exercise the 
power and that the resistance to it had enlisted papal support. 
In fact, at the conference of Seville, held in 1484 by Torquemada, 
there were present the two inquisitors of each of four existing 
tribunals; from Seville we find Juan de San Martin, one of the 
original appointees of 1479, but his colleague, Miguel de Morillo, 
has disappeared and is replaced by Juan Ruiz de Medina, who 
had been merely assessor, while but a single one, Pero Martinez 
de Barrio, of the seven commissioned by Sixtus IV in 1482 
appears as representing the other tribunals—the rest are all new 
men, doubtless appointees of Torquemada.’ There was evidently 
a bitter quarrel on foot between Torquemada and the original 
papal nominees, who held that their powers, delegated directly 
from the pope, rendered them independent of him, and, as usual, 
the Holy See inclined to one side or to the other in the most 
exasperating manner, as opposing interests brought influence to 
bear. Complaints against Torquemada were sufficiently numerous 
and serious to oblige him thrice to send Fray Alonso Valaja to 
the papal court to justify him.* He seems to have removed 
Miguel de Morillo, who vindicated himself in Rome, for a brief 
of Innocent VIII, February 23, 1487, appoints him inquisitor 
of Seville, in complete disregard of the faculties granted to 
Torquemada. Then a motu proprio of November 26, 1487, 
suspends both him and Juan de San Martin and commissions 
Torquemada to appoint their successors. Again, a brief of 
January 7, 1488, appoints Juan Inquisitor of Seville, while 
subsequent briefs of the same year are addressed to him con- 
cerning the business of his office as though he were discharging 
its duties independently of Torquemada, but his death in 1489 
removed him from the scene. The quarrel evidently continued, 


1 Thid. fol. 3, 11, 13, 15, 20; Lib. IV, fol. 91, 118, 137; Lib. V, fol. 117, 136, 
138, 151, 199, 200, 251, 264, 295.—Archivo de Alcalé, Hacienda, Leg. 1049. 

2 Instruciones de Sevilla (Arguello, Copilacion de las Instruciones, fol. 2, 
Madrid, 1630). 


3 Pdéramo, p. 156. i 


178 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION _[Boox I 


and at one time Fray Miguel enjoyed a momentary triumph, for 
a papal letter of September 26, 1491, commissions him as 
Inquisitor-general of Castile and Aragon, thus placing him on 
an equality with Torquemada himself.* It would be impossible 
now to determine what part the sovereigns may have had in 
these changes and to what extent the popes disregarded the 
authority conferred on them of appointment and removal. 
There was a constant struggle on the one hand to render the 
Spanish Holy Office national and independent, and on the other 
to keep it subject to papal control. 

Finally the opposition to Torquemada became so strong that 
Alexander VI, in 1494, kindly alleging his great age and infirm- 
ities, commissioned Martin Ponce de Leon, Archbishop of Messina, 
but resident in Spain, Ifiigo Manrique, Bishop of Cdrdova, 
Francisco Sdnchez de la Fuente, Bishop of Avila, and Alonso 
Sudrez de Fuentelsaz, Bishop of Mondonego and successively of 
Lugo and Jaen, as inquisitors-general with the same powers as 
Torquemada; each was independent and could act by himself 
and could even terminate cases commenced by another.’ It is 
quite probable that, to spare his feelings, he was allowed to name 
his colleagues as delegates of his powers, for in some instructions 
issued, in 1494, by Martin of Messina and Francisco of Avila they 
describe themselves as inquisitors-general in all the Spanish 
realms subdelegated by the Inquisitor-general Torquemada.’ .He 
evidently still retained his pre-eminence and was active to the 


1 Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Lib. I de copias, fol. 8, 10.—Monteiro, His- 
toria da Inquisicad, II, 415.—Boletin, XV, 490.—Ripoll IV, 5, 6. 

Somewhat similar was the question which arose, in 1507, on the retirement of 
Diego Deza and the appointment of Ximenes as inquisitor-general of Castile. 
His commission as usual contained the power of appointing and removing or pun- 
ishing all subordinates, but those who derived their commissions from Deza seem 
to have claimed that they were not amenable to Ximenes and it required a 
special brief from Julius II, August 18, 1509, to establish his authority over 
them.—Bulario, Lib. III, fol. 68; Lib. I de copias, fol. 30. 

2 Llorente, Afiales, I, 214.—Francisco de la Fuente, as we have seen was 
inquisitor of Ciudad-Real as early as 1483. Alonso de Fuentelsaz in 1487 was 
one of the inquisitors of Toledo and was then merely a doctor.—Arch. hist. 
nacional, Inq. de Toledo, Leg. 176, n. 673. 

3 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 933.—‘“ Inquisitores generales in 
omnibus regnis et dominiis serenissimorum regis et reginee dominorum nostrorum 
subdelegati a reverendissimo patre nostro fratre Thoma de Torquemada... 
inquisitore generali.’’ 

Yet we have the commission of Martin of Messina, in 1494, issued directly by 
the pope.—Bulario, Lib. I de copias, fol. 3. 


Cuap. IV] FIVE INQUISITORS-GENERAL 179 


last, for we have letters from Ferdinand to him in the first half 
of 1498 concerning the current affairs of the Inquisition, in which 
the Bishop of Lugo declined to interfere with him. The Instruc- 
tions of Avila, in 1498, were issued in his name as inquisitor- 
general, and the assertion that he resigned two years before his 
death, September 16, 1498, is evidently incorrect... In some 
respects, however, the Bishop of Avila had special functions 
which distinguished him from his colleagues, for he was appointed 
by Alexander VI, November 4, 1494, judge of appeals in all 
matters of faith and March 30, 1495, he received special facul- 
ties to degrade ecclesiastics condemned by the Inquisition, or to 
appoint other bishops for that function.2 So long as they were 
in orders clerics were exempt from secular jurisdiction and it 
was necessary to degrade them before they could be delivered 
to the civil authorities for burning. Under the canons, this had 
to be done by their own bishops, who were not always at hand 
for the purpose, and who apparently, when present, sometimes 
refused or delayed to perform the office, which was a serious 
impediment to the business of the Inquisition, as many Judaizing 
Conversos were found among clerics. 

This multiform headship of the Inquisition continued for some 
years until the various incumbents successively died or resigned. 
Ifigo Manrique was the first to disappear, dying in 1496, 
and had no successor. Then, in 1498, followed the Bishop of 
Avila, who had been transferred to Cérdova in 1496. In the 
same year, aS we have seen, Torquemada died, and this time 
the vacancy was filled by the appointment as his successor of 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. I.—Arguello, fol. 12.—Marieta, Hist. 
Kcles, Lib. x11, cap. xcil. 

Torquemada was buried in a chapel of the church of his convent of Santo 
Tomds in Avila. In 1572 the body was removed to another chapel to make 
room for the interment of Francisco de Soto de Salazar, Bishop of Salamanca, 
when it gave forth a supernatural odor of delicious sweetness, greatly confusing 
to those engaged in the sacrilegious task. The Dominican provincial punished 
the authors of the translation and the historian Garibay petitioned the Inquisitor- 
general Quiroga to have the remains restored to their original resting-place, 
which was done in 1586.—Memorias de Garibay, Tit. x (Mem. hist. esp. VII, 
393). 

An anonymous biographer, writing in 1655, tells us that he retired to the con- 
vent of Avila two years before his death, Sept. 26, 1498 and that he has always 
there been reputed as a saint.—Biblioteca Nacional, Seccion de MSS., Ii, 16. 

2 Arch. de Simancas, Patronato Real, Inquisicion, Legajo Unico, fol. 22.— 
Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Lib. I, fol. 136. 


180 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


Diego Deza, then Bishop of Jaen (subsequently, in 1500, of 
Palencia, and in 1505 Archbishop of Seville) who was com- 
missioned, November 24, 1498, for Castile, Leon and Granada, 
and on September 1, 1499, for all the Spanish kingdoms.’ In 
1500 died Martin Archbishop of Messina—apparently a defaulter, 
for, on October 26th of the same year, Ferdinand orders his 
auditor of the confiscations to pass in the accounts of Luis de 
Riva Martin, receiver of Cadiz, 18,000 maravedis due by the 
archbishop for wheat, hay, etc., which he forgives to the heirs.’ 
From this time forward Deza is reckoned as the sole inquisitor- 
general and direct successor of Torquemada, but Fuentelsaz, 
Bishop of Jaen, remained in office, for, as late as January 18, 
1503, an order for the payment of salaries is signed by Deza 
and contains the name of the Bishop of Jaen as also inquisitor- 
general.? He relinquished the position in 1504 and Deza remained 
as sole chief of the Inquisition until, in 1507, he was forced to 
resign as we shall see hereafter. 

At the time of his retirement the kingdoms of Castile and 
Aragon had been separated by the death of Isabella, November 
26, 1504. Ferdinand’s experience with his son-in-law, Philip I, 
and his hope of issue from his marriage in March, 1506, with Ger- 
maine de Foix, in which case the kingdoms would have remained 
separate, warned him of the danger of having his ancestral 
dominions spiritually subordinated to a Castilian subject. Before 
Deza’s resignation, therefore, he applied to Julius II to com- 
mission Juan Enguera, Bishop of Vich, with the powers for 
Aragon which Deza was exercising. Julius seems to have made 
some difficulty about this, for a letter of Ferdinand, from Naples, 
February 6, 1507, to his ambassador at Rome, Francisco de 
Rojas, instructs him to explain that, since he had abandoned 
the title of King of Castile, the jurisdiction was separated and it 
was necessary and convenient that there should be an Inquisition 
for each kingdom.* He prevailed and the appointments of 
Cardinal Ximenes for Castile and of Bishop Enguera for Aragon 
were issued respectively on June 6 and 5, 1507.2 During the 
lifetime of Ximenes the Inquisitions remained disunited, but in 


1 Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Lib. I de copias, fol. 11, 12. 

2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. I. 

8 Ibid. Lib. I; Lib. II, fol. 35. 

* Correspondence of Francisco de Rojas (Boletin, XXVIII, 462). 
5 Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Lib. I de copias, fol. 13, 15. 


Cuap. IV] IT FRAMES ITS OWN RULES yreeSt 


1518, after his death, Charles V caused his former tutor, Cardinal 
Adrian of Utrecht, Bishop of Tortosa, who in 1516 had been 
made Inquisitor-general of Aragon, to be commissioned also for 
Castile, after which there was no further division. During the 
interval Ferdinand had acquired Navarre and had annexed it 
to the crown of Castile, so that the whole of the Peninsula, with 
the exception of Portugal, was united under one organization.’ 


Among other powers granted to Torquemada was that of mod- 
ifying the rules of the Inquisition to adapt them to the require- 
ments of Spain.? The importance of this concession it would be 
difficult to exaggerate, as it rendered the institution virtually self- 
governing. Thus the Spanish Inquisition acquired a character of 
its own, distinguishing it from the moribund tribunals of the 
period in other lands. The men who fashioned it knew perfectly 
what they wanted and in their hands it assumed the shape in 
which it dominated the conscience of every man and was an object 
of terror to the whole population. In the exercise of this power 
Torquemada assembled the inquisitors in Seville, November 29, 
1484, where, in conjunction with his colleagues of the Suprema, 
a series of regulations was agreed upon, known as the Jnstruciones 
de Sevilla, to which, in December of the same year and in January, 
1485, he added further rules, issued in his own name under the 
authority of the sovereigns. In 1488 another assembly was held, 
under the supervision of Ferdinand and Isabella, which issued 
the Instruciones de Valladolid? In 1498 came the /nstruciones 
de Avila—the last in which Torquemada took part—designed 
principally to check the abuses which were rapidly developing, 
and, for the same purpose, a brief addition was made at Seville 
in 1500, by Diego Deza. All these became known in the tribunals 
as the Instruciones Antiguas.t As the institution became thor- 


1 Thid. fol. 20, 72.—Gachard, Correspondance de Charles-Quint et d’Adrien 
VI, p. 235. 

2 Piéramo, p. 137. 

$ Pulgar, Cronica, P. 111, cap. c.—Archivo General de Simancas, Inquisicion, 
Libro 933. 

4 Inquisitor-general Manrique caused the Iustruciones Antiguas to be printed 
collectively, with a supplement classifying the several articles under the head of 
the officials whose duties they defined. This was issued in Seville in 1537 anda * 
copy is preserved in the Bodleian Library, Arch. Seld. A. Subt. 15. Another edi- 
tion wasissued in Madrid in 1576, a copy of which is in the Biblioteca Nacional of 
Madrid, Seccion de MSS. S, 299, fol. 1. It was reprinted again in Madrid, in 1627 


182 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


oughly organized under the control of the Suprema, consultation 
with the subordinate inquisitors was no longer requisite and 
regulations were promulgated by it in cartas acordadas. It was 
difficult, however, to keep the inquisitors strictly in line, and 
variations of practice sprang up which, in 1561, the Inquisitor-. 
general Fernando Valdés endeavored to check by issuing the 
Instruciones Nuevas. Subsequent regulations were required from 
time to time, forming a considerable and somewhat intricate 
body of jurisprudence, which we shall have to consider hereafter. 
At present it is sufficient to indicate how the Inquisition became 
an autonomous body—an imperium in imperio—framing its 
own laws and subject only to the rarely-exercised authority of 
the Holy See and the more or less hesitating control of the 
crown. 

At the same time all the resources of the State were placed at 
its disposal. When an inquisitor came to assume his functions 
the officials took an oath to assist him, to exterminate all whom 
he might designate as heretics and to observe and compel the 
observance by all of the decretals Ad abolendum, Excommun- 
camus, Ut officium Inquisitionis and Ut Inquisitionis negottum— 
the papal legislation of the thirteenth century which made the 
state wholly subservient to the Holy Office and rendered incap- 
able of official position any one suspect in the faith or who 
favored heretics.’ Besides this, all the population was assembled 


and 1630, together with the Instruciones Nuevas, by Gaspar Isidro de Arguello. 
It is to this last edition that my references will be made. All these texts vary in 
some particulars from the originals preserved in the Simancas Archives, Inqui- 
sicion, Libro 933. Where such deviations are of importance they will be noted 
hereafter. Professor Ernst Schafer has performed the service of reprinting the 
Arguello edition, with a German translation, in the Archiv fiir Reformations- . 
geschichte, 1904. 

Llorente (Hist. Crit. cap. v1, art. 1) has given an abstract of the Instruciones 
Antiguas. Curiously enough, in none of the official collections are included the 
instructions issued by Torquemada in December, 1484, and January, 1485, 
except in a few extracts. As they have never been printed I give them in the 
Appendix, together with the 1500 Instructions of Seville, which are likewise for 
the most part inedited. What Llorente printed as Torquemada’s additions 
(Afiales, I, 388) are merely the extracts gathered from Arguello’s compilation, 
where they are credited to El prior en Sevilla, 1485. 

1 See the oath taken, July 20, 1487, by the officials of Catalonia and Barcelona 
to the inquisitor Alonso de Spina in Carbonell’s De Gestis Hereticorum (Coleccion 
de Documentos de la Corona de Aragon, XXVIII, 6). 

The decretals in question were issued by Lucius III, Innocent III, Clement IV 


Cuap. IV] FLIGHT OF NEW CHRISTIANS 183 


to listen to a sermon by the inquisitor, after which all were 
required to swear on the cross and the gospels to help the Holy 
Office and not to impede it in any manner or on any pretext.’ 
It is no wonder that, as this portentous institution spread its 
wings of terror over the land, all who felt themselves liable to 
its animadversion were disposed to seek safety in flight, no 
matter at what sacrifice. That numbers succeeded in this is 
shown by the statistics of the early autos de fe, in which the 
living victims are far outnumbered by the effigies of the absent. 
Thus in Ciudad-Real, during the first two years, fifty-two 
obstinate heretics were burnt and two hundred and twenty 
absentees were condemned.” In Barcelona, where the Inquisition 
was not established until 1487, the first auto de fe, celebrated 
January 25, 1488, showed a list of four living victims to twelve 
effigies of fugitives; in a subsequent one of May 23d, the pro- 
portions were three to forty-two; in one of February 9, 1489, 
three to thirty-nine; in one of March 24, 1490, they were two to 
one hundred and fifty-nine, and in another of June 10, 1491, 
they were three to one hundred and thirty-nine? If the object 
had simply been to purify the land of heresy and apostasy this 
would have been accomplished as well by expatriation as by 
burning or reconciling, but such was not the policy which gov- 
erned the sovereigns, and edicts were issued forbidding all of 
Jewish lineage from leaving Spain and imposing a fine of five 
hundred florins on ship-masters conveying them away.* This was 
not, as it might seem to us, wanton cruelty, although it was harsh, 
inasmuch as it assumed guilt on mere suspicion. To say nothing 
of the confiscations, which were defrauded of the portable property 
carried away by the fugitives, we must bear in mind that, to 
the orthodox of the period, heresy was a positive crime, nay the 


and Boniface VIII, and are embodied in the canon law as Cap. 9 and 13 Extra, 
Lib. v, Tit. vii and Cap. 11 and 18 in Sexto Lib. v, Tit. ii. 

When, in 1510, the jurats of Palermo made difficulties in taking the canonical 
oath, Ferdinand indignantly wrote that he would take it himself if required. 
—Arch. de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. III, fol. 134. 

1 Instruciones de Sevilla, ? 1 (Arguello, fol. 3). 2 Paéramo, p. 170. 

5 Carbonell de Gestis Hzreticorum (Coleccion de Documentos de la Corona de 
Aragon, XXVIII, 12-17, 29, 40-49, 54-61). In these latter cases there is no 
distinction recorded between the fugitive and the dead, which would modify 
somewhat the proportions. 

* Manuel de Novells Ardits, vulgarment appelat Dietari del Antich Consell 
Barceloni, III, 58 (Barcelona, 1894). 


184 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


greatest of crimes, punishable as such by laws in force for cen- 
turies, and the heretic was to be prevented from escaping its 
penalties as much as a murderer or a thief. The royal edicts 
were supplemented by the Inquisition, and it is an illustration 
of the extension of its jurisdiction over all matters, relating 
directly or indirectly to the faith, that, November 8, 1499, the 
Archbishop Martin of Messina issued an order, which was pub- 
lished throughout the realm and was confirmed by Diego Deza, 
January 15, 1502, to the effect that no ship-captain or merchant 
should transport across seas any New Christian, whether Jewish 
or Moorish, without a royal license, under pain of confiscation, 
of excommunication and of being held as a fautor and protector 
of heretics. To render this effective two days later Archbishop 
Martin ordered that suitable persons should be sent to all the 
sea-ports to arrest all New Christians desiring to cross the sea 
and bring them to the Inquisition so that justice should be done 
to them, all expenses being defrayed out of the confiscations,* 
These provisions were not allowed to be a dead-letter, though 
we are apt to hear of them rather in cases where, for special 
reasons, the penalties were remitted. Thus, July 24, 1499, 
Ferdinand writes to the Inquisitors of Barcelona that a ship of 
Charles de Sant Climent, a merchant of their city, had brought 
from Alexandria to Aiguesmortes certain persons who had fled 
from Spain. Even this transportation between foreign ports 
came within the purview of the law, for Ferdinand explains that 
action in this case would be to his disservice, wherefore if 
complaint is lodged with them they are to refer it to him or to 
the inquisitor-general for instructions. Again, on November 8, 
1500, the king orders the release of the caravel and other property 
of Diego de la Mesquita of Seville, which had been seized because 
he had carried some New Christians to Naples—the reason for 
the release being the services of Diego in the war wtih Naples 
and those which he is rendering elsewhere. A letter from 
Ferdinand to the King of Portugal, November 7, 1500, recites 
that recently some New Christians had been arrested in Milaga, 
where they were embarking under pretext of going to Rome for 
the jubilee. On examination by the Inquisition at Seville they 
admitted that they were Jews but said that they had been forced 
in Portugal to turn Christians; as this brought them under 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 933. 


Cuap. IV] GENERAL SUBMISSION 185 


inquisitorial jurisdiction, the inquisitors were sending to Portugal 
for evidence and the king was asked to protect the envoys and 
give them facilities for the purpose." The same determination 
was manifested to recapture when possible those who had suc- 
ceeded in effecting their flight. In 1496 Micer Martin, inquisitor 
of Mallorca, heard of some who were in Bugia, a sea-port of 
Africa. He forthwith despatched the notary, Lope de Vergara, 
thither to seize them, but the misbelieving Moors disregarded 
his safe-conduct and threw him and his party into a dungeon 
where they languished for three years. He at length was ran- 
somed and, in recompense of his losses and sufferings, Ferdinand 
ordered, March 31, 1499, Matheo de Morrano receiver of Mallorca 
to pay him two hundred and fifty gold ducats without requiring 
of him any itemized statement of his injuries.’ 


It shows how strong an impression had already been made by 
the resolute character of the sovereigns, and how violent was the 
antagonism generally entertained for the Conversos, that so novel 
and absolute a tyranny could be imposed on the lately turbulent 
population of Castile without resistance, and that so powerful 
a class as that against which persecution was directed should 
have submitted without an effort save the abortive plots at 
Seville and Toledo. The indications that have reached us of 
opposition to the arbitrary acts of the Inquisition in making 
arrests or confiscations are singularly few. In the records of 
the town-council of Xeres de la Frontera, under date of August 
28, 1482, there is an entry reciting that there had come to the 
town a man carrying a wand and calling himself an alguazil of 
the Inquisition; he had seized Goncalo Cacabé and carried him 
off without showing his authority to the local officials, which was 
characterized as an atrocious proceeding and the town ought to 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Librol. By a letter of February 22, 1501, 
Ferdinand and Isabella congratulate the inquisitors on their action in such cases; 
if other New Christians assert that they had been converted by force justice is to 
be executed on them. 

In 1511 a ship belonging to Gaspar de la Cavallerfa of Naples was seized in 
Barcelona. The master, Francisco de Santa Cruz, hurried to the court at 
Seville, where the inquisitor-general Enguera condemned the vessel and he gave 
security in its full value. Meanwhile the receiver of confiscations at Barcelona 
sold it without waiting for its condemnation, whereupon Ferdinand ordered 
the money returned and the vessel taken back.—Ibidem, Lib. III, fol. 139. 

2 Tbidem, Lib. I. 


186 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


take steps with the king, the pope and the Inquisition to have 
it undone.* Doubtless the summary acts of the Holy Office, 
over-riding all recognized law, created such feeling in many places, 
as we may gather from a cédula of Ferdinand, December 15, 
1484, forbidding the reception of heretics and ordering their 
surrender on demand of the inquisitors, and another of July 8, 
1487, commanding that any one bearing orders from the inquis- 
itors of Toledo is to be allowed to arrest any person, under a 
penalty of 100,000 maravedis for the rich and confiscation for 
others,? but complaints were dangerous, for they could be met 
by threats of punishment for fautorship of heresy. Still it 
required considerable time to accustom the nobles and people 
to unquestioning submission to a domination so absolute and so 
foreign to their experience. As late as the year 1500 there are 
two royal letters to the Count of Benalcdzar reciting that he had 
ordered the arrest of a girl of Herrera who had uttered scandals 
against the faith; she was in the hands of his alcaide, Gutierre 
de Sotomayor, who refused to deliver her when the inquisitor 
sent for her. The second letter, after an interval of nineteen 
days, points out the gravity of the offence and peremptorily 
orders the surrender of the girl. She proved to be a Jewish 
prophetess whose trial resulted in bringing to the stake large 
numbers of her unfortunate disciples. There is also an anticipa- 
tion of resistance in a letter, Janary 12, 1501, to the Prior of 
St. John, charging him to see that no impediments are placed 
in the way of the receiver of the Inquisition of Jaen in seizing 
certain confiscated property at Alcdzar de Consuegra.? More 
indicative of popular repugnance is a letter of October 4, 1502, 
to the royal officials of a place not specified, reciting that the 
people are endeavoring to have Mosen Salvador Serras, lieutenant 
of the vicar, removed because he had spoken well of the Inqui- 
sition and had been charged by the inquisitors with certain 
duties to perform; they are not to allow this to be done and are 
to see that he is not ill-treated.* In 1509 Ferdinand had occasion 
to remonstrate with the Duke of Alva, in the case of Alonso de 
Jaen, a resident of Coria, because, when he was arrested, an agent 
of the duke had seized certain cows and sold them and, when he 
was condemned and his property confiscated, Alva had forbidden 


1 Boletin, XV, 323. 
? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 939, fol. 62, 146. 
§ Tbidem, Libro I. * Ibidem, Lib. II, fol. 17. 


Cuap. IV] REPRESSION OF ABUSES 187 


any one to purchase anything without his permission. Ferdinand 
charges him to allow the sale to proceed freely and to account 
for the cows, pointing out that he had granted to him a third 
of the net proceeds of all confiscations in his estates.’ This grant 
of a third of the confiscations was made to other great nobles 
and doubtless tended to reconcile them to the operations of the 
Inquisition. In this general acquiescence it is somewhat remark- 
able that, as late as 1520, when Charles V ordered Merida to 
prepare accommodations for a tribunal, the city remonsirated; 
everything there was quiet and peaceable, it said, and it feared 
a tumult if the Holy Office was established there, while if merely 
a visit was made for an inquest it would lend willing aid. Cardinal 
Adrian hearkened to the. warning in Charles’s absence and in a 
letter of November 27, 1520, ordered his inquisitors to settle 
somewhere else.’ 

At the same time it was inevitable that power so irresponsible 
would be frequently and greatly abused, and it is interesting 
to observe that, when no resistance was made, Ferdinand 
was, as a general rule, prompt to intervene in favor of the 
oppressed. Thus January 28, 1498, he writes to the inquisitors- 
general that recently some officials of the Inquisition of Valencia 
went to the barony of Serra to arrest some women who wore 
Moorish dress and, as they were not recognized, they were resisted 
by the Moors, whereupon the inquisitors proceeded to seize all 
the Moors of Serra who chanced to come to Valencia, so that 
the place was becoming depopulated. He therefore orders the 
inquisitors-general to intimate to their subordinates that they 
must find some other method whereby the innocent shall not 
suffer for the fault of individuals and, not content with this, he 
wrote directly to the Inquisitor of Valencia, instructing him to 
proceed with much moderation. In another case where opposition 
had been provoked he writes, January 18, 1499, ‘‘ We have your 
letter and are much displeased with the maltreatment which 
you report of the inquisitor and his officials. It will be attended 
to duly. But often you yourselves are the cause of it, for if 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. ITI, fol. 42. This letter is dated 
Dec. 22, 1509. It is duplicated January 19, 1510 (Ibid. fol. 48). Seven of the 
Duke’s officials had been summoned to appear before the Suprema and had 
disregarded the order, which was repeated January 21st under pain of confiscation 
and punishment at the royal pleasure.—Ibid. fol. 57. 

2 Ibidem, Libro 73, fol. 115. 


188 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


each of you would attend to his duties quietly and carefully and 
injure no one you would be held in good esteem. Look to this 
in the future, for it will displease us much if you do what you 
ought not, with little foundation.”’ At the same time he charges 
the inquisitor not to make arrests without good cause, ‘‘for in 
such things, besides the charge on your conscience, the Holy 
Office is much defamed and its officials despised.” So in a letter 
of August 15, 1500, to the inquisitors of Saragossa, he tells them 
that he has received a copy of an edict which they had issued 
at Calatayud; it is so sharp that if it is enforced no one can be 
safe; they must consider such things carefully or consult him; 
in the present case they will obey the instructions sent by the 
inquisitors-general and must always bear in mind that the only 
object of the Inquisition is the salvation of souls. Again, when 
the inquisitors of Barcelona imperiously placed the town of 
Perpifian under interdict, in a quarrel arising out of a censal or 
ground-rent on Carcella, Ferdinand writes to them, March 5, 
1501, that the town is poor and must be gently treated, especially 
as it is on the frontier, and he sends a special envoy to arrange 
the matter... The wearing delays, which were one of the most 
terrible engines of oppression by the Inquisition, were especially — 
distasteful to him. January 28, 1498, he writes to an inquisitor 
about the case of Anton Ruiz of Teruel, who had been imprisoned 
for five months without trial for some remarks made by him to 
another person about the confiscation of the property of Jaime 
de Santangel, though application had been made repeatedly to 
have the case despatched. Ferdinand orders that it be con- 
sidered at once; the prisoner is either to be discharged on bail 
or proper punishment is to be inflicted. So, January 16, 1501, 
he reminds inquisitors that he has written to them several times 
to conclude the case between the heirs of Mossen Perea and the 
sons of Anton Ritz and deliver sentence; the case has been 
concluded for some time but the sentence is withheld; it must 
be rendered at once or the case must be either delegated to a 
competent person or be sent to the Suprema. At the same time, 
whenever there was the semblance of opposition to an injustice, 
on the part of the secular authorities, he was prompt to repress 
it. The action of the Inquisition of Valencia, in confiscating the 
property of a certain Valenzuola, excited so much feeling that 


? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro I. 


Cuap. IV] FERDINAND’S BIGOTRY 189 


the governor, the auditor-general, the royal council and the 
jurados met to protest against it and in so doing said some things 
unpleasing to the inquisitors, who thereupon complained to 
Ferdinand. He wrote to the offenders, March 21, 1499, rebuking 
them severely; it was none of their business; if the inquisitors 
committed an injustice the appeal lay to the inquisitor-general, 
who would rectify it; their duty was to aid the Inquisition and 
he ordered them to do so in future and not to create scandal. 
He was more considerate when the frontier town of Perpifian 
was concerned, for in 1513, when the deputy receiver of confisca- 
tions provoked antagonism by the vigor of his proceedings and 
the consuls complained that he had publicly insulted Franco 
Maler, one of their number, Ferdinand ordered the inquisitor of 
Barcelona to investigate the matter at once and to inflict due 
punishment.’ 

His whole correspondence shows the untiring interest which 
he felt in the institution, not merely as a financial or political 
instrument, but as a means of defending and advancing the 
faith. He was sincerely bigoted and, when he had witnessed an 
auto de fe in Valladolid, he wrote, September 30, 1509, to the 
inquisitor Juan Alonso de Navia to express the great pleasure 
which it had given him as a means of advancing the honor and 
glory of God and the exaltation of the Holy Catholic faith.® 
Inquisitors were in the habit of sending him reports of the autos 
celebrated by them, to which he would reply in terms of high 
satisfaction, urging them to increased zeal. On one occasion, 
in 1512, and on another in 1513, he was so much pleased that he 
made a present to the inquisitor of two hundred ducats and 
ordered fifteen ducats to be given to the messenger.’ 


A quarter of a century elapsed before there was, in the Castilian 
kingdoms, any serious resistance to the Inquisition. The trouble 
which then occurred was provoked by the excesses of an inquisitor 
named Lucero at Cérdova, which were brought to light only by 
the relaxation of Ferdinand’s stern rule during the brief reign 
of Philip of Austria and the subsequent interregnum. As this 
affords us the only opportunity of obtaining an inside view of 
what was possible, under the usually impenetrable mantle of 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib.I. ? Ibidem, Lib. ITI, fol. 221. 
8 Ibidem, Lib. III, fol. 22. * Tbidem, Lib. ITI, fol. 193, 214. 


190 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Book I 


secrecy characteristic of inquisitorial procedure, it is worthy of 
investigation in some detail. 

Cérdova was somewhat unfortunate in its inquisitors; whether 
more or less so than other communities it would now be impossible 
to say. Lucero’s predecessor was Doctor Guiral, Dean of Guadix, 
who was transferred from there to Avila, in 1499. Falling under 
suspicion for irregularities, a papal brief was procured com- 
missioning the Archbishop of Toledo to investigate him—and it 
is noteworthy that, although the inquisitor-general had full 
power of appointment, punishment and dismissal, papal inter- 
vention was deemed necessary in this case. The result showed 
the ample opportunities offered by the position for irregular 
gains and for oppression and injustice. He had received 150,000 
maravedis by selling to penitents exemptions from wearing the 
sanbenito, or penitential garment. A large amount was secured 
in various ways from the receiver of confiscations, who was 
evidently an accomplice and who, of course, received his share 
of the spoils. Pilfering from sequestrated property yielded 
something, including ninety-three pearls of great value. Through 
his servants he gathered rewards or percentages offered, as we 
shall see, for discovering concealed confiscated property. He 
pocketed the fines which he imposed on reconciled penitents 
and was therefore interested in aggravating them. He negotiated 
for the Conversos of Cérdova an agreement under which they 
compounded with 2,200,000 maravedis for confiscations to which 
they might become liable, and for this he received from them 
nearly 100,000, to which he added 50,000 by enabling two of the 
contributors to cheat their fellows by escaping payment of their 
assessments to the common fund. When transferred to Avila 
his field of operations was less productive, but he made what he 
could by extorting money from the kindred of his prisoners, and 
he did not disdain to take ten ducats and an ass from an official 
of the prison for some offence committed. As the royal fise 
suffered from his practices he was arrested and tried, but, unfor- 
tunately, the documents at hand do not inform us as to the 
result.’ 

His successor at Cordova, Diego Rodriguez Lucero, was a 
criminal of larger views and bolder type, who presents himself 
to us as the incarnation of the evils resultant from the virtually 


? Archivo de Simancas, Patronato real; Inquisicion, Legajo unico, fol. 37, 


Cap. IV] EXCESSES OF LUCERO 191 


irresponsible powers lodged in the tribunals. Our first glimpse 
of him is in 1495, when he figures as inquisitor of Xeres and the 
recipient from Ferdinand and Isabella of a canonry in Cadiz. 
This shows that he had already gained the favor of the sovereigns, 
which increased after his promotion to Cérdova, September 7, 
1499, where, by the methods which we shall presently see, his 
discoveries of apostate Judaizers were very impressive. A royal 
letter of December 11, 1500, cordially thanked him for the ample 
details of a recent despatch relating how he was every day 
unearthing new heretics; he was urged to spare no effort for their 
punishment, especially of those who had relapsed, and to report 
at once everything that he did. His zeal scarce required this 
stimulation and his lawless methods are indicated by a letter 
of February 12, 1501, of Ferdinand and Isabella to their son-in- 
law Manoel of Portugal, expatiating on the numerous heretics 
recently discovered in Cordova, of whom two_heresiarchs, 
Alfonso Ferndndez Herrero and Fernando de Cérdova had 
escaped to Portugal, whither Lucero had despatched his alguazil 
to bring them back without waiting to obtain royal letters. 
This was an unwarrantable act and, when the alguazil seized the 
fugitives, Manoel refused license to extradite them until he should 
have an opportunity of seeing the evidence against them. Ferdi- 
nand and Isabella declare that this would be a grievous impedi- 
ment to the Holy Office and disservice to God and they affection- 
ately entreat Manoel to surrender the accused for the honor of 
God and also to protect from maltreatment the officials who 
had aided in their capture. 

We may not uncharitably assume that a portion, at least, of 
the favor shown to Lucero may have been due to the pecuniary 
results of his activity. By this time the confiscations, which 
at first had contributed largely to the royal treasury, were con- 
siderably diminished and at some places were scarce defraying 
the expenses of the tribunals. To this Cérdova was now an 
exception; that its productiveness was rapidly growing is 
manifest from a letter of Ferdinand, March 12, 1501, to the 
receiver, Andrés de Medina, stating that he learns that there is 
much to be done and authorizing the appointment of two assist- 
ants at salaries of 10,000 maravedis and, on January 12 and 13, 


1 Informe de Quesada (Biblioteca nacional, Seccion de MSS., T, 28). 
? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro I. 


192 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


1503, orders were drawn on Cérdova for 500,000 maravedis to 
defray inquisitorial salaries elsewhere. On the same date we 
have another illustration of Lucero’s activity in the sudden arrest 
of four of the official public scriveners. As they were the deposi- 
taries of the papers of their clients, the sequestration of all their 
effects produced enormous complications, to relieve which Ferdi- 
nand ordered all private documents to be sorted out and put in 
the hands of another scrivener, Luis de Mesa. This shows how 
the operations of the Inquisition might at any moment affect 
the interests of any man and it illustrates another of the profits 
of persecution for, when these delinquents should be burnt or 
disabled from holding public office, there would be four vacancies 
to be eagerly contended for by those who had money or favor 
for their acquisition.’ 

As early as 1501 there is evidence of hostility between Lucero 
and the Cérdovan authorities.. When the receiver of confiscations, 
accompanied by Diego de Barrionuevo, scrivener of sequestra- 
tions, was holding a public auction of confiscated property, 
the alguazil mayor of the city, Gonzalo de Mayorga, ordered 
the town-crier, Juan Sanchez, who was crying the auction, to 
come with him in order to make certain proclamations. The 
serivener interposed and refused to let SAnchez go; hot words 
passed in which Mayorga insulted the Inquisition and finally 
struck the scrivener with his wand of office, after which the 
alealde mayor of the city, Diego Ruiz de Zarate, carried him off 
to prison. The inviolability of the officials of the Inquisition 
was vindicated by a royal sentence of September 6th, in which 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro I. 

The redistribution of offices may be reckoned among the influences which 
reconciled the Old Christians to the Inquisition. These had been largely in the 
hands of Conversos, causing so much jealousy that the prospect of acquiring 
them led numbers of aspirants to wish for the sharpest and speediest action. It 
was too slow for their eagerness and expectative grants were sought for and 
made in advance so as to profit by the next victim. The vacancies passed into 
the hands of the receivers and were distributed by the sovereigns as favor or 
policy might dictate. See Appendix for suggestive extracts from the register 
of the receiver of Valencia. 

A significant case is that of Juan Cardona, public scrivener and notary of 
mortmains, who became disqualified by the condemnation of the memory of his 
father, Leonardo Cardona, whereupon Ferdinand treated his offices as confiscated 
and, by cédula of December 5, 1511, bestowed them on Juan Argent, notary of 
the tribunal which had rendered the sentence.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, 
Libro III, fol. 33, 161. 


Cuar. IV] SECRETARY CALCENA 193 


Mayorga, in addition to the arbitrary penance to be imposed 
on him by Lucero, was deprived of his office for life, was disabled 
from filling any public position whatever, and was banished 
perpetually from Cérdova and its district, which he was to leave 
within eight days after notification. Zarate was more mercifully 
treated and escaped with six months’ suspension from office.’ 
This severity to civic officials of high position was a warning to 
all men that Lucero was not to be trifled with. 

The unwavering support that he received from Ferdinand is 
largely explicable by the complicity of Juan Réoiz de Calcena, 
a corrupt and’ mercenary official whom we shall frequently meet 
hereafter. He was Ferdinand’s secretary in inquisitorial affairs, 
conducting all his correspondence in such matters, and was also 
secretary to the Suprema, and thus was able in great degree to 
control his master’s action, rendering his participation in the 
villainies on foot essential to their success. How these were 
worked is displayed in a single case which happens to be described 
in a memorial from the city of Cérdova to Queen Juana. The 
Archdeacon of Castro, Juan Mufioz, was a youth of seventeen, 
the son of an Old Christian mother and a Converso hidalgo. His 
benefice was worth 300,000 maravedis a year and he was a fair 
subject of spoliation, for which a plot was organized in 1505. 
His parents were involved in his ruin, all three were arrested 
and convicted and he was penanced so as to disable him from 
holding preferment. The spoils were divided between Cardinal 
Bernardino Carvajal, for whom bulls had been procured in 
advance, Morales the royal treasurer, Lucero and Calcena. The 
governor and chapter of Cérdova gave the archdeaconry to 
Diego Vello, chaplain of the bishop, but the Holy See con- 
veniently refused confirmation and bestowed it on Morales; 
Lucero obtained a canonry in Seville and some benefices in 
Cuenca, while Calcena received property estimated at 4,000,000 
maravedis—doubtless an exaggerated figure representing the 
ageregate of his gains from complicity throughout Lucero’s 
career.” 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro I. 

2 Archivo de Simancas, Patronato Real, Inquisicion, Leg. tinico, fol. 46.—Juan 
Gomez Bravo, Catdlogo de los Obispos de Cérdova, I, 392. 

In 1513 an attempt was made to review the trial of the parents and son, when 
Ferdinand summoned the Royal Council to sit with the Suprema in the case show- 
ing his determination that the sentence should not be set aside (Archivo de 

13 


194 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


It was probably in 1501 that the combination was formed 
which emboldened Lucero to extend his operations, arresting 
and condemning nobles and gentlemen and church dignitaries, 
many of them Old Christians of unblemished reputation and 
limpios de sangre. It was easy, by abuse and threats, or by 
torture if necessary, to procure from the accused whatever 
evidence was necessary to convict, not only themselves but 
whomsoever it was desired to ruin. A great fear fell upon the 
whole population, for no one could tell where the next blow 
might fall, as the circle of denunciation spread through all ranks. 
Apologists from that time to this have endeavored to extenuate 
these proceedings by suggesting that those compromised endeav- 
ored to secure allies by inculpating in their confessions men of 
rank and influence, but in view of Lucero’s methods and the 
extent of his operations such an explanation is wholly inadequate 
to overthrow the damning mass of evidence against him.’ 

His views expanded beyond the narrow bounds of Cérdova, 
and he horrified the land by gathering evidence of a vast con- 
spiracy, ramifying throughout Spain, for the purpose of sub- 
verting Christianity and replacing it with Judaism, which required 
for its suppression the most comprehensive and pitiless measures. 
In memorials to Queen Juana the authorities, ecclesiastic and 
secular, of Cordova described how he had certain of his prisoners 
assiduously instructed in Jewish prayers and rites so that they 
could be accurate in the testimony which, by menaces or torture, 
he forced them to bear against Old Christians of undoubted 
orthodoxy. In this way he proved that there were twenty-five 
profetissas who were engaged in traversing the land to convert 
it to Judaism, although many of those designated had never in 
their lives been outside of the city gates. Accompanying them 
were fifty distinguished personages, including ecclesiastics and 
preachers of note.? Of course, these stories lost nothing in 
passing from mouth to mouth, and it was popularly said that 
some of these prophetesses, in their unholy errand, travelled as 


Simancas, Inq., Libro 9, fol. 146). The effort to obtain justice was unsuccessful 
for, in 1515, we happen to find Calcena in possession of a house renting at 9000 
mrs. per annum which had formed part of the confiscation (Ibid., Libro 3, fol. 
439). 

1 Epistt. Pet. Mart. Anglerii, Epist. 374.—Zurita, Hist. del Rey Hernando, 
Lib. vu, cap. xxix.—Rodrigo, Hist. verdadera, II, 238. Cf. Lorenzo de Padilla, 
Crénica de Felipe I (Coleccion de Documentos, VIII, 153). 

? Archivo de Simancas, Patronato Real, Inquisicion, Leg. tinico, fol. 46, 


Cuap. IV] LUCERO'S REIGN OF TERROR 195 


drunken Bacchantes and others were transported on goats by 
the powers of hell. A single instance, which happens to have 
reached us, illustrates the savage thoroughness with which he 
protected the faith from this assault. A certain Bachiller Mem- 
breque was convicted as an apostate Judaizer who had dis- 
seminated his doctrines by preaching. Lists were gathered from 
witnesses of those who had attended his sermons and these, to 
the number of a hundred and seven, were burnt alive in a single 
auto de fe. The inquisitorial prisons were filled with the unfor- 
tunates under accusation, as many as four hundred being thus 
incarcerated, and large numbers were carried to Toro where, at 
the time, Inquisitor-general Deza resided with the Suprema. 

The reign of terror thus established was by no means confined 
to Cordova. Its effects are energetically described by the Capitan 
Gonzalo de Avora, in a letter of July 16, 1507, to the royal 
secretary Almazan. After premising that he had represented to 
Ferdinand, with that monarch’s assent, that there were three 
things requisite for the good of the kingdom—to conduct the 
Inquisition righteously without weakening it, to wage war with 
the Moors, and to relieve the burdens of the people—he proceeds 
to contrast this with what had been done. ‘“‘As for the Inqui- 
sition,” he says, ‘‘the method adopted was to place so much 
confidence in the Archbishop of Seville (Deza) and in Lucero and 
Juan de la Fuente that they were able to defame the whole 
kingdom, to destroy, without God or justice, a great part of it, 
slaying and robbing and violating maids and wives to the great 
dishonor of the Christian religion. . . . As for what con- 
cerns myself I repeat what I have already written to you, 
that the damages which the wicked officials of the Inquisition 
have wrought in my land are so many and so great that no 
reasonable person on hearing of them would not grieve.”* When 
a horde of rapacious officials, clothed in virtual inviolability, 
was let loose upon a defenceless population, such violence and 
rapine were inevitable incidents, and the motive of this was 
explained, by the Bishop of Cérdova and all the authorities of 
the city, in a petition to the pope, to be the greed of the inquisi- 
tors for the confiscations which they habitually embezzled.* 


1 Epistt. Pet. Mart., Epist. 385. 

2 Archivo de la Catedral de Cérdova, Cajon I, n. 300; Cajon J n. 295, 296. 
8 Boletin, XVII, 447-51. 

4 Archivo de la Catedral de Cérdova, Cajon I, n. 304. 


196 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boor I 


It was probably in 1505, after the death of Isabella, November 
16, 1504, that the people of Cordova first ventured to complain 
to Deza. He offered to send the Archdeacon Torquemada who, 
with representatives of the chapter and the magistrates, should 
make an impartial investigation, but when the city accepted the 
proposition he withdrew it. A deputation consisting of three 
church dignitaries was then sent to him asking for the arrest 
and prosecution of Lucero. He replied that if they would draw 
up accusations in legal form he would act as would best: tend to 
God’s service, and, if necessary, would appoint judges to whom 
they could not object... This was a manifest evasion, for the 
evidence was under the seal of the Inquisition and Deza alone 
could order an investigation. Apparently realizing that it was 
useless to appeal to Ferdinand, whose ears were closed by Calcena, 
their next recourse was to Isabella’s daughter and successor, 
Queen Juana, then in Flanders with her husband Philip of 
Austria. Philip was eager to exercise an act of sovereignty in 
the kingdom, which Ferdinand was governing in the name of his 
daughter and, on September 30, 1505, a cédula bearing the 
signatures of Philip and Juana was addressed to Deza, alleging 
their desire to be present and participate in the action of the 
Inquisition and meanwhile suspending it until their approaching 
arrival in Castile, under penalty of banishment and seizure of 
temporalities for disobedience, at the same time protesting that 
their desire was to favor and not to injure the Holy Office. 
Although a circular letter to all the grandees announced this 
resolution and commanded them to enforce it, no attention was 
paid to it. Don Diego de Guevara, Philip’s envoy, in fact wrote 
to him the following June that his action had produced a bad 
impression, for the people were hostile to the Conversos and 
there was talk of massacres like that of Lisbon.’ 

The next step of the opponents of Lucero was to recuse Deza 
as judge and to interject an appeal to the Holy See, leading to 
an active contest in Rome between Ferdinand and his son-in-law. 
A letter of the former, April 22, 1506, to Juan de Loaysa, agent 
of the Inquisition in Rome, described the attempt as an audacious 
and indecent effort to destroy the Inquisition which was more 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Patronato Real, Inquisicion, Leg. tinico, fol. 46.— 
Zurita, Hist. del Rey Hernando, Lib. vu, cap. xxix. 

? Coleccion de Documentos, VIII, 336, 337—Gachard, Voyages des Souverains, 
I, 519. 


Cuap. IV] ARCHBISHOP TALAVERA 197 


necessary than ever. Loaysa was told that he could render no 
greater service to God and to the king than by defeating it; 
minute instructions were given as to the influences that he must 
bring to bear, and he was reminded that Holy Writ permits the 
use of craft and cunning to perform the work of God. The 
extreme anxiety betrayed in the letter indicates that there was 
much more involved than the mere defence of Lucero and Deza; 
it was with Philip and Juana that he was wrestling and the stake 
was the crown of Castile. On the other hand, Philip, doubtless 
won by the gold of the Conversos, had fairly espoused their 
cause and was laboring to obtain for them a favorable decision 
from the pope. His ambassador, Philibert of Utrecht, under 
date of June 28th, reported that he had urged Julius II not to 
reject the appeal of the Marranos but the politic pontiff replied 
that he must reserve his decision until Ferdinand and Philip 
had met.’ 

Undeterred by the mutterings of the rising storm, Lucero 
about this time saw in Isabella’s death a chance to strike at a 
higher quarry than he had hitherto ventured to aim at. The 
Geronimite Hernando de Talavera had won her affectionate 
veneration as her confessor and, on the conquest of Granada, 
in 1492, she had made him archbishop of the province founded 
there. He had a Jewish strain in his blood, as was the case in 
so many Spanish families; he was in his eightieth year, he was 
reverenced as the pattern and exemplar of all Christian virtues 
and he devoted himself unsparingly to the welfare of his flock, 
spending his revenues in charity and seeking by persuasion and 
example to win over to the faith his Moorish subjects. Yet he 
was not without enemies, for he had been the active agent in 
the reclamation by Ferdinand and Isabella, in 1480, of royal 
revenues to the amount of thirty millions of maravedfs, alienated 
by Henry IV to purchase the submission of rebellious nobles 
and, although a quarter of a century had passed, it is said that 
the vengeful spirit thus aroused was still eager to encompass 
his ruin.’ 

Whatever may have been Lucero’s motive, inquisitorial 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Gracia y Justicia, Inquisicion, Leg. 621, fol. 198.— 
Biblioteca nacional, Seccion de MSS., D, 118, n. 11, fol. 24.—Llorente, Afiales, I, 


328.-—Gachard, Voyages des Souverains, I, 548. 
2 Clemencin, Elogio de la Reina Isabel, pp. 144-5.—Pedraza, Hist. de Granada, 


P. Iv, cap. xxxi (Granada, 1638). 


198 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


methods afforded abundant facilities for its accomplishment. 
He selected a woman whom he had tortured on the charge of 
being a Jewish prophetess and maintaining a synagogue in her 
house. He threatened her with further torture unless she should 
testify to what she had seen in a room in Talavera’s palace and, 
on her replying that she did not know, he instructed her that an 
assembly was held, divided into three classes; in the first was 
the archbishop, with the bishops of Almeria, Jaen and others; 
in the second, the dean and the provisor of Granada, the treasurer, 
the alcaide and other officials; in the third the prophetesses, the 
sister and nieces of Talavera, Dofia Maria de Pefialosa and others. 
They agreed to traverse the kingdom, preaching and prophesying 
the advent of Elias and the Messiah, in concert with the prophets 
who were in the house of Fernan Alvarez of Toledo, where they 
were crowned with golden crowns.’ All this was duly sworn to 
by the witness, as dictated to her by the fiscal, and formed a basis 
for the prosecution of Talavera and his family, doubtless sup- 
ported by ample corroborative evidence, readily obtainable in 
the same manner. The occurrence of the name of the Bishop of 
Jaen suggests a further political intrigue; he was Alfonso Sudrez 
de Fuentelsaz, the former colleague of Deza as inquisitor-general 
and was no doubt known as inclining to the Flemish party, as 
he subsequently accepted from Philip the presidency of the 
Royal Council. 

Impenetrable secrecy was one of the most cherished principles 
of inquisitorial procedure, but Lucero probably desired to prepare 
the public for the impending blow and whispers concerning it 
began to circulate. Peter Martyr of Anghiera, who was attached 
to the royal court, wrote on January 3, 1506, to the Count of 
Tendilla, Governor of Granada, that Lucero, by means of 
witnesses under torture, had succeeded in imputing Judaism to 
the archbishop and his whole family and household; as there 
was no one more holy than Talavera, he found it difficult to 
believe that any one could be found to fabricate such a charge.” 
The attack commenced by arresting, in the most public and 
offensive manner, Talavera’s nephew, the dean and the officials 
of his church, during divine service and in his presence, evidently 
with the purpose of discrediting him. The arrest followed of his 
sister, his nieces and his servants, and we can readily conceive 


1 Archivo de la Catedral de Cérdova, Cajon J, n. 297. 
27 Pet. Mart. Angler. Epist. 295. 


Car. IV] PHILIP AND JUANA 199 


the means by which even his kindred were compelled to give 
evidence incriminating him, as we gather from a letter of Ferdi- 
nand, June 9, 1506, to his ambassador at Rome, Francisco de 
Rojas, in which he says that the testimony against Talavera 
is that of his sisters and kindred and servants.’ Before he could 
be arrested and prosecuted, however, special authorization from 
the Holy See was requisite, for, by a decree of Boniface VIII, 
inquisitors had no direct jurisdiction over bishops. For this, 
Ferdinand’s intervention was necessary and, after some hesitation, 
he consented to make the application. The inculpatory evidence 
given by Talavera’s family was sent to Rome; Francisco de 
Rojas procured the papal commission for his trial and forwarded 
it, June 3, 1506.’ 

Before it was despatched, however, Ferdinand’s position had 
changed with the arrival in Spain of his daughter Juana, now 
Queen of Castile, and her husband Philip of Austria. Eager to 
throw off Ferdinand’s iron rule and to win the favor of the new 
sovereigns, most of the nobles had flocked to them and with 
them the Conversos, who hoped to secure a modification in the 
rigor of the Inquisition. They had been aroused by the sufferings 
of their brethren in Cérdova, whose cause was their own, and 
they were becoming an element not to be disregarded in the 
political situation; they had already secured a hearing in the 
Roman curia, always ready, as we shall see hereafter, to welcome 
appellants with money and to sacrifice them after payment 
received; they had obtained from Julius IJ commissions trans- 
ferring from the Inquisition cognizance of certain cases—com- 
missions which Ferdinand repeatedly asked the pope to withdraw 
and doubtless with success, as they do not appear in the course 
of events; they had even approached Ferdinand himself, while 
in Valladolid, with an offer of a hundred thousand ducats if he 
would suspend the Inquisition until the arrival of Juana and 
Philip. This offer, he says in a letter of June 9, 1506, to Rojas, 
he spurned, but we may perhaps doubt his disinterestedness 
when he adds that, as Philip has disembarked and 1s unfamiliar 


1 Llorente, Hist. crft. Append. n. 9.—Correspondence of Rojas (Boletin, 
XAXVITI, 448). | 

2? Dom Clemencin (Elogio, Illust. xvi1) prints a noble and touching letter of 
reproof from Talavera to Ferdinand. He had had the direction of royal con- 
sciences too long to feel awe of royal personages. Spiritually he felt himself the 
king’s superior and his perfectly frank simplicity of character led him to mani- 
fest this without disguise. 


200 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


with Spanish affairs, he had secretly ordered Deza to suspend 
the operations of all the tribunals—the motive of which evidently 
was to create the belief that Philip was responsible for it. As 
for Talavera, he adds, as it would greatly scandalize the new 
converts of Granada, if they thought there were errors of faith 
in him whom they regarded as so good a Christian, he had con- 
cluded to let the matter rest for the present and would subse- 
quently send instructions. He evidently had no belief in Lucero’s 
fabricated evidence, a fact to be borne in mind when we consider 
his attitude in the ultimate developments of the affair. This 
despatch, of course, reached Rojas too late to prevent the issuing 
of the commission to try Talavera, but it explains why that 
document was suppressed when it arrived. Deza denied receiving 
it; it disappeared and Talavera, in his letter of January 23, 1507, 
to Ferdinand, manifests much anxiety to know what had become 
of it, evidently dreading that it would be opportunely found 
when wanted. 

By the agreement of Villafdfila, June 27, 1506, Ferdinand 
bound himself to abandon Castile to Philip and Juana; he 
departed for Aragon and busied himself with preparations for a 
voyage to Naples, whither he set sail September 4th. Philip 
assumed the government and disembarrassed himself of his wife 
by shutting her up as unfit to share in the cares of royalty. He 
was amenable to the golden arguments of the Conversos and 
doubtless had not forgotten the contempt with which had been 
treated his order of the previous year to suspend the Inquisition. 
He therefore naturally was in no haste to revive its functions. 
Ferdinand’s secretary Almazan writes to Rojas, July 1st, that the 
king and the grandees have imprisoned Juana and no one is 
allowed to see her; he has in vain sought to get some prelates 
to carry letters from her to her father, but no one ventures to 
do so; the grandees have done this to partition among themselves 
the royal power, the Conversos to free themselves from the 
Inquisition, which is now extinct.’ 


1 Correspondence of Rojas (Boletin, XVIII, 444, 448).—Gachard, Voyages des 
Souverains, I, 534, 540. 

2 Correspondence of Rojas (Boletin, XVITI, 452). 

The story of Queen Juana la loca is one of the saddest in the annals of royalty 
and her treatment by her father, husband and son is a libel on human nature, 
but no one who has impartially examined all the evidence can doubt that she 
was incapable of governing. 


Cuap. IV] THE INQUISITION SUCCUMBS 201 


The people of Cérdova made haste to take advantage of the 
situation. They sent a powerful appeal to Philip and Juana, 
stating that their previous complaints had been intercepted 
through Deza’s influence and accusing Lucero of the most arbi- 
trary iniquities.’ They asked that all the inquisitorial officials 
at Cordova and Toro should be removed and the whole affair 
be committed to the Bishop of Leon. Philip referred the matter 
to the Comendador mayor, Garcilasso de la Vega and to Andrea di 
Borgo, ambassador of Maximilian I, two laymen, to the great 
scandal, we are told, of all ecclesiastics? The Conversos were 
triumphant and the Inquisition succumbed completely. The 
Suprema, including Deza himself, hastened to disclaim all 
responsibility for Lucero’s misdeeds in a letter addressed to the 
chapter of Cérdova, in which it said that the accusations brought 
against him seemed incredible, for even highwaymen, when 
robbing their victims, spare their lives, while here not only the 
property but the lives of the victims were taken and the honor 
of their descendants to the tenth generation. But, after hearing 
the narrative of the Master of Toro there could no longer be 
doubt and to tolerate it would be to approve it. Therefore, the 
chapter was instructed to continue to prevent these iniquities 
and their majesties would be asked to apply a remedy and to 
punish their authors.* The remedy applied was to compel Deza 
to subdelegate irrevocably to Diego Ram{irez de Guzman, Bishop 
of Catania and member of the Council of State, power to supersede 
Lucero and revise his acts, which was confirmed by a papal brief 
placing in Guzman’s hands all the papers and prisoners in Cérdova, 
Toro and Valladolid.* Lucero endeavored to anticipate this by 
burning all his prisoners so as to get them out of the way, but 
after the auto de fe was announced there came orders from the 
sovereigns which fortunately prevented the holocaust. 

The relief of the sufferers seemed assured, but the situation was 
radically changed by the sudden death of Philip, September 25, 
1506, for although Juana was treated nominally as queen, she 
exercised no authority. Deza promptly revoked Guzman’s com- 
mission, of which the papal confirmation seems not to have been 


1 Archivo de la Catedral de Cérdova, Cajon A, n. 5. 

2 Zurita, Hist. del Rey Hernando, Lib. vu, cap. vi. 

3 Archivo de la Catedral de Cérdova, Cajon I, n. 302. 

* Ibidem, n. 300. 

5 Archivo de Simancas, Patronato Real, Inquisicion, Leg. tinico, fol. 46. 


202 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


received; he took possession of the prisoners at Toro and sent the 
Archdeacon of Torquemada to Cérdova to do the same, but 
Francisco Osorio, the representative of Guzman, refused to obey. 
The people of Cordova were in despair. It was in vain that they 
sent delegations to Deza and petitioned the queen to save them. 
Deza was immovable and the queen refused to act in this as in 
everything else. The chapter, every member of which was an 
Old Christian, proud of his limpieza, assembled on October 16th 
to consider the situation. Some of the most prominent dignitaries 
of the Church had already been arrested by Lucero and had been 
treated by him as Jewish dogs; he had asserted that all the rest, 
and most of the nobles and gentlemen of the city and of other 
places, were apostates who had converted their houses into syn- 
agogues; in view of the impending peril, it was unanimously 
resolved to defend themselves, while the citizens at large declared 
that they would sacrifice life and property rather than to submit 
longer to such insupportable tyranny.’ 

If the eclipse of the royal authority had enabled Deza to 
restore Lucero to power it also afforded opportunity for forcible 
resistance. The grandees of Castile were striving to recover the 
independence enjoyed under Henry IV, and a condition of 
anarchy was approaching rapidly. The two great nobles of 
Cérdova, the Count of Cabra, Lord of Baena and the Marquis of 
Priego, Lord of Aguilar and nephew of the Great Captain, were 
nothing loath to listen to the entreaties of the citizens, especially 
as the marquis had been summoned by Lucero to appear for 
trial. Meetings were held in which formal accusations of Lucero 
and his promotor fiscal, Juan de Arriola, were laid before Padre 
Fray Francisco de Cuesta, comendador of the convent of la 
Merced, who seems to have assumed the leadership of the move- 
ment. He pronounced judgement, ordering Lucero and the fiscal 
to be arrested and their property to be confiscated. Under the 
lead of Cabra and Priego the citizens arose to execute the judge- 
ment. On November 9th they broke into the alcdzar, where the 
Inquisition held its seat, they seized the fiscal and some of the 
subordinates and liberated the prisoners, whose recital of their 
wrongs excited still more the popular indignation, but no blood 
was shed and Lucero saved himself by flight.” The whole pro- 


1 Archivo de la Catedral de Cérdova, Cajon J, n. 295, 298.—Archivo de Siman- 
cas, Patronato Real, Inquisicion, Leg. tinico, fol. 46. 
? Archivo de la Catedral de Cérdova, Cajon I, n. 301. 


Cuap. IV] PERSECUTION RENEWED 203 


ceeding appears to have been orderly; a commission of ecclesiastics 
and laymen was appointed, to which the kinsmen and friends of 
the prisoners gave security that they should be forthcoming for 
trial, as soon as there should be a king in the land to administer 
justice. This engagement was duly kept and their temporary 
liberation under bail was justified on the ground that many of 
them had been incarcerated for six or seven years and that all 
were in danger of perishing by starvation, for they were penniless, 
their property having been confiscated and Deza having ordered 
the receiver of confiscations not to provide for them.! 

When the news of this uprising reached Deza he promptly, 
November 18th, commissioned his nephew, Pedro Judrez de Deza, 
Archbishop-elect of the Indies, to prosecute and punish all 
concerned, while by his orders the tribunal of Toledo intercepted 
and threw into prison Doctor Alonso de Toro, sent by the city 
to present its case to the queen. Other envoys, however, bore 
instructions to ask for the removal of Deza and the prosecution 
of Lucero and his officials, coupled with the intimation that steps 
had been taken to convoke all the cities of Andalusia and Castile 
to devise measures of protection against the intolerable tyranny 
of the Inquisition.” This plan seems to have been abandoned 
but, early in January, 1507, the Bishop of Cérdova, Juan de 
Daza, in conjunction with the clerical and secular authorities, 
sent a solemn appeal to the pope, asking him to appoint Arch- 
bishop Ximenes and the Bishop of Catania or of Malaga, with 
full power to investigate and to act, and this they accompanied, 
January 10th, witha petition to Ferdinand, who was still in Naples, 
to support their request to the pope.’ Deza, however, continued 
to command Ferdinand’s unwavering support and the result was 
seen in the prompt and uncompromising action of Julius IT. 
He wrote to Deza that the Jews, pretending to be Christians, 
who had dared to rise against the Inquisition, must be extermi- 
nated root and branch; no labor was to be spared to suppress this 
pestilence before it should spread, to hunt up all who had par- 
ticipated in it and to exercise the utmost severity in punishing 
them, without appeal, for their crimes.‘ 


1 Lorenzo de Padilla, Crénica de Felipe I (Coleccion de Documentos, VIII, 
153).—Archivo de Simancas, Patronato Real, Inquisicion, Leg. tinico, fol. 46. 

2 Archivo de la Catedral de Cérdova, Cajon I, n. 301.—Archivo de Simancas, 
loc. cit. 

8 Archivo de la Catedral de Cordova, Cajon A, n. 5; Cajon I, n. 304. 

* Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Lib. III, fol. 320.—See Appendix. 


904. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boor I 


Thus stimulated and encouraged, Lucero resumed his activity 
and the liberated prisoners were surrendered to him. Peter 
Martyr writes from the court, March 7, 1507, to Archbishop 
Talavera, that his sister and his nephew the Dean of Granada, 
Francisco Herrera—who had doubtless been released in the 
rising of November 9th—had been thrown in prison in Cérdova. 
Talavera himself, moreover, was put on trial before the papal 
nuncio, Giovanni Ruffo, and assessors duly commissioned by the 
pope, showing that Ferdinand’s scruples as to scandalizing the 
people of Granada had vanished in the fierce resolve to vindicate 
Lucero and that the missing papal brief had been duly found. 
Peter Martyr describes his earnest efforts to convince the judges 
of Talavera’s holy life and spotless character, to which they re- 
plied that all this might be true but their business was to ascertain 
the secrets of his heart.’ By the time the evidence was sent to 
Rome, however, his conviction was no longer desired; the 
testimony was pronounced to be worthless and Pascual de la 
Fuente, Bishop of Burgos, who was in attendance on the curia, 
was an earnest witness in his favor.” The papal sentence was 
acquittal and this apparently carried with it the exoneration of 
his kindred—but it came too late. On May 21st Peter Martyr 
exultingly writes to him that the dean and his sister with their 
mother and the rest of his innocent household had been set free, 
but already he had gone to a higher tribunal. On Ascension-day 
(May 13th) he had walked, bareheaded and barefooted, in the 
procession through the streets of Granada, when a violent fever 
set in and carried him off the next day. He had accumulated 
no treasure, having spent all his revenues on the poor; he left no 
provision for his family and the Bishop of Malaga charitably 
gave to his sister a house in Granada to shelter her old age. 
His reputation for sanctity is seen in the accounts which at once 
were circulated, with universal credence of the miracles wrought 
by him in curing the sick.’ 


1 Pet. Mart. Epistt., 333, 334, 335. 

2 Pedraza, Hist. eccles. de Granada, P. Iv, cap. 31-34. 

3 Pet. Mart. Epistt., 342, 344, 457.—Pedraza, loc. cit. 

The Inquisition which had hunted him to the death could never forgive him 
for his escape. When, in 1559, Inquisitor-general Valdés compiled the first 
Index of prohibited books, a long-forgotten controversial tract against the Jews, 
printed by Talavera in 1480, was resuscitated and condemned in order to cast a 
slur upon his memory and this was carefully preserved through the long series 


le i i i 


Cuap. IV] POLITICAL INTRIGUES 205 


The reaction in favor of the Inquisition, led by Ferdinand and 
Julius II, had evidently been short-lived, for the political situa- 
tion dominated everything and king and pope found it advisable 
to yield. Juana was keeping herself secluded with the corpse 
of her husband and was refusing to govern. The rival factions 
of the two grandfathers of Charles V, Maximilian I and Ferdi- 
nand, each striving for the regency during his minority, were 
both desirous of the support of the Conversos and thus the 
question of the Cordovan prisoners attained national importance 
as one on which all parties took sides. Ximenes, the Duke of 
Alva and the Constable of Castile, the heads of Ferdinand’s party, 
held a conference at Cavia and listened to the complaints against 
Deza, for which they promised to find a remedy. The friends of 
the prisoners, however, seemed more inclined towards the faction 
of Maximilian; they offered money to defray the expenses of 
troops to be sent to Spain to resist Ferdinand’s return and it 
was currently rumored that four thousand men were gathered 
in a Flemish port ready to embark. It is not easy to penetrate 
the secret intrigues culminating in the settlement which gave 
the regency to Ferdinand, but Ximenes, who represented him, 
took advantage of the situation, with his usual skill, to further 
his own ambition, which was to gain the cardinal’s hat and 
Deza’s position as inquisitor-general.* For the former of these 
Ferdinand had made application as early as November 8, 1505, 
and had repeated the request October 30, 1506; it was granted 
in secret consistory, January 4, 1507, and was published May 17th 
For the latter, the complaints of the Conversos afforded sub- 
stantial reasons; we have seen that Cérdova had petitioned the 
pope to commission Ximenes as its judge and his appointment 
would help to pacify the troubles. Ferdinand at length recog- 


of Spanish Indexes down to the last one in 1790.—Reusch, Die Indices Libror. 
Prohib., p. 232.—Indice Ultimo, p. 262. 

1 Zurita, Hist. del Rey Hernando, Lib. vi, cap. xxix, xxxiv, xlii; Lib. v1, 
cap. i, v.— Villa, La Reina Juana, pp. 462, 463. 

Zurita, who, as an official of the Suprema, no doubt reflects the tradition of the 
Inquisition, says that many murmured at seeing Ferdinand, to win over Ximenes, 
sacrifice Deza, for the latter was a most notable prelate, a man of great learning 
and devoted to the king’s service. He has claims too on our respect as the 
patron of Columbus, befriending and encouraging him when disheartened by the 
incredulity of the court.—Irving’s Life and Voyages of Columbus, Book m1, Chap. 
3, 4; Book xvu, Chap 3. 

? Correspondence of Rojas (Boletin, XXVIII, 440, 457).—Ciacconii et Oldoini 
Vit. Pontif. III, 261. 


206 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boor I 


nized that Deza’s sacrifice was inevitable, and the way was made 
easy for him, as he was allowed to resign. On May 18th Ferdinand 
writes to Ximenes from Naples that he had received Deza’s 
resignation and had taken the necessary steps to secure for him 
the succession; he has two requests to make—that he shall foster 
piety and religion by appointing only the best men and that he 
shall exercise the utmost care that nothing shall be allowed to 
impair Deza’s dignity... The commission as inquisitor-general 
was duly issued on June 5, 1507. 

The hatred excited by Lucero had been too wide-spread and 
the friends of the prisoners were too powerful to be satisfied with 
the mere substitution of Ximenes for Deza, and there was 
evidently an understanding that the matter was not to be dropped. 
As early as May Ist, Peter Martyr writes that it is reported that 
the imprisoned witnesses, corrupted by Lucero, are to be released 
and that he will expiate with due punishment his unprecedented 
crimes.” Some such promise was probably necessary for the 
pacification of the land, but the delay in its performance is 
significant of protection at the fountain-head of justice. It 
assumed at first the shape of an action brought by the chapter 
and city of Cordova before the pope, charging Lucero with the 
evil wrought by his suborning some witnesses and compelling 
others by punishment to testify that the plaintiffs were heretics. 
Julius II commissioned Fray Francisco de Mayorga as apostolic 
judge to try the case, and, on October 17, 1507, he decreed that 
Lucero be imprisoned and held to answer at law. Nothing 
further was done, however, and the impatient citizens addressed 
a memorial to Queen Juana, asking her to send some one to 


inform himself about it and report to her.* The action of the 


apostolic judge seems to have been regarded as a mere formality; 
the months passed away and it was not until May 18, 1508, that 
the Suprema took independent cognizance of the matter, when 
Ximenes and his colleagues, except Aguirre, all voted that 
Lucero should be arrested.* Peter Martyr intimates more than 


* Gomesii de Rebus gestis Francisci Ximenii, fol. 77 (Compluti, 1569). 

2 Pet. Mart. Epist., 339. 

* Archivo de la Catedral de Toledo, Cajon I, n. 303. 

* Biblioteca nacional, Seccion de MSS., G, 61, fol. 208. 

The Licenciado Ortufio Ibafiez de Aguirre was a layman whom Ferdinand 
forced into the Suprema against the earnest resistance of its members, probably 
with the view of screening Lucero. He was the éme damnée of Ferdinand who 
corresponded with him confidentially when he wanted anything done. His fidelity 


Ee 


Cuar. IV] LUCEROS VICTIMS RELEASED 207 


once that numbers of the Suprema were suspected of complicity 
with Lucero and assures us that the Council did not act without 
thorough investigation of numerous witnesses and interminable 
masses of documents, revealing an incredible accumulation of 
impossible and fantastic accusations contrived to bring infamy 
on all Spain.’ 

It was apparently the first time that an inquisitor had been 
thus publicly put on trial for official malfeasance and the oppor- 
tunity was improved to render the spectacle a solemn one, 
fitted not only te satisfy the national interest felt in the case 
but to magnify the office of the accused by the scale of the 
machinery employed to deal with him. Lucero was carried in 
chains to Burgos, where the court was in residence, and was 
confined in the castle under strict guard. Ximenes assembled 
a Congregacion Catélica, composed of twenty-one members besides 
himself, including a large portion of the Royal Council, the 
Inquisitor-general of Aragon and other inquisitors, several bishops 
and various other dignitaries—in short, an imposing representa- 
tion of the piety and learning of the land. After numerous 
sessions, presided over by Ximenes, sentence was rendered July 
9, 1508, and was published August Ist, at Valladolid, whither the 
court had removed, in presence of Ferdinand and his magnates 
and a great concourse assembled to lend solemnity to this resto- 
ration of the honor of Castile and Andalusia, which had been so 
deeply compromised by the pretended revelations extorted by 
Lucero. This weighty verdict declared that there were no 
erounds for the asserted existence of synagogues, the preaching 
of sermons and the assemblies of missionaries of Judaism or for 
the prosecution of those accused. The witnesses—or rather 
prisoners—were discharged and everything relating to these 
fictitious crimes was ordered to be expunged from the records. 
To complete the vindication of the memory of the victims, 
Ferdinand ordered the rebuilding of the houses which had been 


was stimulated with fayors, as when in December, 1513, Ferdinand gave him an 
order on the receiver of Seville for 300,000 mrs. (Archivo de Simancas, Inqui- 
sicion, Lib. 9, fol. 145). Las Casas, however, expresses a favorable opinion of htm 
and he was one of the executors of Isabella’s testament.—Hist. de las Indias, 
Lib. 111, cap. 138 (Coleccion de Documentos, LXVI, 81). 

1 Pet. Mart. Epistt., 370, 382, 385. 

2 In contrast with these spectacular proceedings was the removal, by the 
inquisitor-general in 1500, without even stating the reasons, of Diego Fernandez 
de Bonilla, Inquisitor of Extremadura.—Llorente, Afiales, I, 260. 


208 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


torn down under the provisions of the canon law requiring the 
destruction of the conventicles of heresy... By implication, the 
acquittal of the prisoners convicted Lucero, but all this was 
merely preliminary to his trial. 

Ferdinand’s hand had been forced; he had been obliged to 
yield to public opinion, but his resolve was inflexible to undo 
as far as he could the results reached by Ximenes. In October 
he visited Cérdova, where he rewarded some officials of the 
tribunal by grants out of the confiscated estates, which should 
have been restored when the proceedings were annulled. It is 
true that the judge of confiscations, Licenciado Simancas, was 
suspended, but in November, 1509, he was ordered to resume 
his functions and to act as he had formerly done. We happen 
to know that, in 1513, the house of the unfortunate Bachiller 
Membreque was still in possession of the Inquisition. There was 
no relief for those who had suffered. When the new inquisitor, 
Diego Lépez de Cortegano, Archdeacon of Seville, revoked Lu- 
cero’s sentence on the Licenciado Daza, who had been penanced 
and his property confiscated, the purchasers who had bought 
it complained to Ferdinand and he expressed his wrath by 
promptly dismissing the inquisitor and ordering all the papers 
in the case to be sent to the Suprema for review and action. 
The vacancy thus created was not easy to fill, for when, in 
September, 1509, Ferdinand offered the place to Alonso de 
Mariana he declined, saying that it would kill him, but he agreed 
to take the tribunal of Toledo, and it was not until February, 
1510, that the Licenciado Mondragon was transferred from 
Valladolid to take Cortegano’s place. In fact, the interests 
involved in the confiscations were too many and too powerful 
for the victims to obtain justice. Martin Alonso Conchina had 
been condemned by Lucero to reconciliation and confiscation; 
when the pressure was removed he revoked his confession as 
having been extorted by threats and fear, whereupon the con- 
fiscated property was placed in sequestration awaiting the result. 


1 Pet. Mart. Epist., 393.—Llorente, Memoria histdérica, p. 145 (Madrid, 1812). 
—Llorente, Afiales, I, 356.—Gomesii de Rebus F. Ximenii, fol. 77.—Lorenzo de 
Padilla (Coleccion de Documentos, VIII, 154). 

Llorente’s account of the proceedings at Valladolid is drawn from Bravo’s 
“Catalogo de los Obispos de Cérdova”’ (Cérdova, 1778). It is perhaps worth 
remarking that, in my copy of that work, the sheet containing these passages is 
lacking—probably owing to inquisitorial censorship. 


Cuap. IV] REACTION—ESCAPE OF LUCERO 209 


Unluckily for him one of the items, a ground-rent of 9000 mrs. 
a year had been given,in April, 1506, to the unprincipled secretary 
Calcena, with the result that one of the new inquisitors, Andrés 
Sanchez de Torquemada, promptly arrested Conchina, tried him 
again, convicted him and sentenced him to perpetual imprison- 
ment, so that the confiscation held good and the ground-rent, 
with all arrears, was confirmed to Calcena by a royal cédula of 
December 23, 1509. There seems to have still been some obstacle 
to this reaction in the episcopal Ordinary, Francisco de Simancas, 
Archdeacon of Cérdova for, in February, 1510, Ferdinand wrote 
to the bishop that, without letting it be known that the order 
came from the king, he must be replaced with some one zealous 
for the furtherance of justice and, a month later, this command 
was peremptorily repeated. It is true that the extravagant 
wickedness of Lucero was scarce to be dreaded, but, with a 
tribunal reconstructed under such auspices, the people of Cérdova 
could not hope for justice tempered with mercy and its pro- 
ductive activity is evidenced by the large drafts made, in 1510, 
on its receiver of confiscations. We may assume that Ximenes 
looked on this with disfavor for, in a letter to Ferdinand, after 
his return from the expedition to Oran in 1509, he supplicates 
that the decision of the Congregation be maintained for he has 
never infringed it and never intends to do so. 

As for the author of the evil, Lucero himself, he was sent in 
chains to Burgos with some of his accomplices. Ximenes, as 
inquisitor-general, had full power, as we have seen, to dismiss 
and punish them but, for some occult reason, a papal commission 
for their trial was applied for. This caused delay under which 
Ferdinand chafed, for he wrote, September 30, 1509, to his 
ambassador complaining that it caused great inconvenience and 
ordering him to urge the pope to issue it at once so that it could 
be sent by the first courier.2 When it came, it empowered the 
Suprema to try the case and Ferdinand, who warmly espoused 
Lucero’s cause, expressed his feelings unequivocally in a letter 
of April 7, 1510—‘‘the prisoners say that they have been long 
in prison and those who informed against them have gone to 
Portugal or other parts, and others have been burnt or penanced 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 3, fol. 12, 13, 21, 31, 32, 33, 41, 42, 
43, 48, 58, 61, 62, 72, 80, 86, 130; Lib. 9, fol. 146; Patronato Real, Inquisicion, 
Leg. tinico, fol. 33. 


? Ibidem, Libro 3, fol. 23. 
14 


210 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


as heretics, showing clearly that they testified falsely, and they 
supplicate me to provide that their trial be by inquisitorial and 
not by accusatorial process, so that they shall not be exposed 
to greater infamy than hitherto by dead or perjured witnesses, 
especially as the law provides that the trial be summary and 
directed only to reach the truth. There is great compassion for 
their long imprisonment and suffering, wherefore I beg and 
charge you to look well into the matter and treat it conscien- 
tiously and with diligence for its speedy termination, with which 
I shall be well pleased.’ 

In spite of this urgency the trial dragged on, much delay being 
caused by the difficulty of finding an advocate willing to under- 
take Lucero’s defence. The Suprema selected the Bachiller de la 
Torre, but he declined to serve and Ferdinand, on May 16th, 
expressed his fear that no one would assume the duty. July 19th 
he writes that Lucero complains that he still has no counsel and 
he suggests that, if none of the lawyers of the royal court can be 
trusted, Doctor Juan de Ordufia of Valladolid be called in and 
his fees be paid by the Inquisition. The suggestion was adopted 
and, on August 20th, Ferdinand wrote personally to Ordufia 
ordering him to take charge of the defence and see that Lucero 
suffered no wrong, and at, the same time, he wrote to the Uni- 
versity of Valladolid to give Ordufia the requisite leave of absence. 
Under this royal pressure, and considering that the adverse 
witnesses had been largely burnt or frightened into flight, it is 
perhaps rather creditable to the Suprema that it ventured to 
dismiss Lucero, without inflicting further punishment on him. 
He retired to the Seville canonry, which he had acquired by the 
ruin of the Archdeacon of Castro, and there he ended his days 
in peace. In 1514, Ferdinand manifested his undiminished 
sympathy by a gift of 15,000 mrs. to Juan Carrasco, the former 
portero of the tribunal of Cordova, to indemnify him for losses 
and sufferings which he claimed to have endured in the rising 
of 1506.2 Yet before we utterly condemn him for his share in 
this nefarious business we should make allowance for the influence 
of Lucero’s accomplice, his secretary Calcena, who was always 
at hand to poison his mind and draft his letters. To the same 
malign obsession may doubtless also be attributed an order of 
Charles V, in 1519, requiring the Cérdovan authorities to bestow 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 3, fol. 84. 
? TIbidem, fol. 90, 106, 118, 119, 375.—Gomesii de Rebus Ximenii, fol. 77. 


Cuap. IV] INQUISITORIAL METHODS 211 


the first vacant scrivenership on Diego Marino, who had been 
Lucero’s notary.’ 


That Lucero was an exceptional monster may well be admitted, 
but when such wickedness could be safely perpetrated for years 
and only be exposed and ended through the accidental inter- 
vention of Philip and Juana, it may safely be assumed that the 
temptations of secrecy and irresponsibility rendered frightful 
abuses, if not universdl at least frequent. The brief reign of 
Philip led other ‘sorely vexed communities to appeal to the 
sovereigns for relief, and some of their memorials have been 
preserved. One from Jaen relates that the tribunal of that city 
procured from Lucero a useful witness whom for five years he 
had kept in the prison of Cérdova to swear to what was wanted. 
His name was Diego de Algeciras and, if the petitioners are to 
be believed, he was, in addition to being a perjurer, a drunkard, 
a gambler, a forger and a clipper of coins. This worthy was 
brought to Jaen and performed his functions so satisfactorily 
that the wealthiest Conversos were soon imprisoned. Two 
hundred wretches crowded the filthy gaol and it was requisite 
to forbid the rest of the Conversos from leaving the city without 
a license. * With Diego’s assistance and the free use of torture, 
on both accused and witnesses, it was not difficult to obtain 
whatever evidence was desired. The notary of the tribunal, 
‘Antonio de Barcena, was especially successful in this. On one 
‘occasion he locked a young girl of fifteen in a room, stripped 
cher naked and scourged her until she consented to bear testimony 
against her mother. A prisoner was carried in a chair to the 
auto de fe with his feet burnt to the bone; he and his wife were 
‘burnt alive and then two of their slaves were imprisoned and 
forced to give such evidence as was necessary to justify the 
execution. The cells in which the unfortunates were confined 
dn heavy chains were narrow, dark, humid, filthy and overrun 
‘with vermin, while their sequestrated property was squandered 
‘by .the officials, so that they nearly starved in prison while their 
‘helpless children starved outside. Granting that there may be 
‘exaggeration in this, the solid substratum of truth is clear from 
the fact: that the petitioners only asked that the tribunal be 
‘placed under the control of the Bishop of Jaen—that bishop being 
Alfonso Sudrez de Fuentelsaz, one of Torquemada’s inquisitors, 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 9, fol. 26. 


212 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


who had risen to be a colleague of Deza. He had not been a 
merciful judge, as many of his sentences attest, yet the miserable 
Conversos of Jaen were ready to fly to him for relief.’ 

A memorial from Arjona, a considerable town near Jaen, 
illustrates a different phase of the subject. It relates that a 
certain Alvaro de Escalera of that place conspired with other 
evil men to report to the inquisitors of Jaen that there were 
numerous heretics in Arjona, so that when confiscations came 
to be sold they could buy the property cheap. In due time an 
inquisitor came with the notary Barcena. No Term of Grace 
was given, but the Edict of Faith was published, frightening the 
inhabitants with its fulminations unless they testified against 
their neighbors. Then a Dominican preached a fiery sermon to 
the effect that all Conversos were really Jews, whom it was the 
duty of Christians to destroy. The inquisitors then sent for the 
slaves of the Conversos, promising them liberty if they would 
testify against their masters and assuring them of secrecy. The 
notary followed by traversing the town with Escalera and his 
friends, proclaiming that there was a fine of ten reales on all 
who would not come forward with testimony, and the exaction 
of the fine from a number had a quickening influence on the 
memories of others. Then a house to house canvass was made 
for evidence; the women were told that it was impossible that 
they should not know the Jewish tendencies of their neighbors; 
they could give what evidence they pleased for their names 
would not be divulged; they were not obliged to prove it, for 
the accused had to disprove it. Those who would not talk were 
threatened that they would be carried to Jaen and made to 
accuse their neighbors, and, in fact, a number were taken and 
compelled to give evidence in prison. Then the inquisitors 
departed with the accumulated testimony; there was peace in 
Arjona for three months and the Conversos recovered from 
their fright. Suddenly one night there arrived the notary, the 
receiver and some officials; they quietly aroused the regidores 
and alcaldes and made them collect a force of armed men who 
were stationed to guard the walls and gates. When morning 
came the work of arresting the suspects was commenced; their 
property was sequestrated, their houses locked and their children 
were turned into the street, while the officials carried off their 
prisoners, who were thrust into the already crowded gaol of 


‘ Archivo de Simancas, Patronato Real, Inquisicion, Leg. tinico, fol. 43, 


Cuap. IV] INQUISITORIAL METHODS 21S 


Jaen. The confiscations were auctioned off and those who had 
plotted the raid had ample opportunity of speculating in bar- 
gains.’ 

Still other methods are detailed in a memorial from Llerena, 
the seat of one of the older tribunals with jurisdiction over 
Extremadura. It stated that for many years the Inquisition 
there had found little or nothing to do, until there came a new 
judge, the Licenciado Bravo. He was a native of Fregenal, a 
town of the province, where he had bitter law-suits and active 
- enmities; he had had two months’ training under Lucero at 
Cérdova and he came armed with ample evidence gathered 
there. On his arrival, without waiting for formalities or further 
testimony, he made a large number of arrests and sent to Badajoz 
where he seized forty more and brought them to Llerena. They 
were mostly men of wealth whose fortunes were attractive objects 
of spoliation, and Bravo took care of his kindred by appointing 
them to positions in which they could appropriate much of the 
sequestrated property. The treatment of the prisoners was most 
brutal, and when his colleague, Inquisitor Villart, who was not 
wholly devoid of compassion, was overheard remonstrating with 
him and saying that the death of the captives would be on their 
souls, Bravo told him to hold his peace, for he who had placed 
him there desired that they should all die off, one by one. The 
petitioners were quite willing to be remitted to the tribunal of 
Seville or to have judges who would punish the guilty and dis- 
charge the innocent, but they earnestly begged, by the Passion 
of Christ, that they should not be left to the mercy of Inquisitor- 
general Deza. Orders, they said, had been given to him to 
mitigate in some degree the sufferings of the people of Jaen, 
which he suppressed and replaced with instructions to execute 
justice. What this meant we may gather from a last despairing 
appeal, by the friends of the prisoners of Jaen, to Queen Juana; 
a junta of lawyers, they said, had been assembled, a scaffold of 
immense proportions was under construction; their only hope 
was in her and they entreated her to order that no auto de fe 
be held until impartial persons should ascertain the truth as to 
, the miserable captives.” Juana was in no condition to respond 
to this agonized prayer, and we may safely assume that greed 
and cruelty claimed their victims. These glimpses into the 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Patronato Real, Inquisicion, Leg. tinico, fol. 43. 
2 Ibidem, fol. 44, 45. 


914 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


methods of the tribunals elucidate the statements of the Capitan 
Avora as to the desolation spread over the land by the Inqui- 
sition. 


It would seem that these fearful abuses were creating a general 
feeling of hostility to the institution and its officials, for Ferdinand 
deemed it necessary to issue a proclamation, January 19, 1510, 
calling upon all officials, gentlemen and good citizens to furnish 
inquisitors and their subordinates with lodgings and supplies at 
current prices and not to maltreat or assail them, under penalty 
of 50,000 maravedis and punishment at the royal discretion. 
‘A month later, February 22d, we find him writing to the constable 
iof Castile that inquisitors are to visit the districts of Burgos 
‘and Calahorra, and he asks the constable to give orders that they 
‘may not be impeded. Somewhat similar instructions he gave 
in March to the provisor and corregidor of Cuenca, when the 
inquisitors of Cartagena were preparing to visit that portion of 
their district, as though these special interpositions of the royal 
‘power were requisite to ensure their comfort and safety in the 
discharge of their regular duties. Even these were sometimes 
ineffectual as was experienced, in 1515, by the inquisitor Paradinas 
of Cartagena, who, while riding on his mule in the streets of 
Murcia, was set upon, stabbed and would have been killed but 
for assistance, while the assassins escaped, calling forth from 
Ferdinand the most emphatic orders for their arrest and trial. 

Yet, however rudely the Inquisition may have been shaken, 
it was too firmly rooted in the convictions of the period and too 
energetically supported by Ferdinand to be either destroyed or 
essentially reformed. When he died, January 23, 1516, his 
testament, executed the day previous, laid strenuous injunctions 
on his grandson and successor Charles V—‘ As all other virtues are 
nothing without faith, by which and in which we are saved, we 
command the said illustrious prince, our grandson, to be always 
zealous in defending and exalting the Catholic faith and that he 
aid, defend and favor the Church of God and labor, with all his 
strength, to destroy and extirpate heresy from our kingdoms 
and lordships, selecting and appointing throughout them ministers, . 
-God-fearing and of good conscience, who will conduct the Inqui- 
‘sition justly and properly, for the service of God and the exalta- 


? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 3, fol. 47, 49, 63, 70, 329, 407. 


Cuap. IV] XIMENES ATTEMPTS REFORM 215 


tion of the Catholic faith, and who will also have great zeal for 
the destruction of the sect of Mahomet.’’? 

With his death, during the absence of his successor, the 
governing power was lodged in the hands of Inquisitor-general 
Ximenes. From the papal brief of August 18, 1509, alluded to 
above (p. 178), we may infer that he had already endeavored to 
effect a partial reform, by dismissing some of the more obnoxious 
inquisitors, and he now made use of his authority to strike at 
those who had hitherto been beyond his reach. Aguirre was one 
of these and another was the mercenary Calcena, concerning 
whom he wrote to Charles, December, 1516, that it was necessary 
that they should in future have nothing to do with the Inquisition 
in view of their foul excesses. Another removal, of which we 
chance to have cognizance, was that of Juan Ortiz de Zarate, 
the secretary of the Suprema. Whatever were the failings of 
the inflexible Ximenes, pecuniary corruption was abhorrent to 
him and, during the short term of his supremacy in Castile, we 
may feel assured that he showed no mercy to those who sought 
to coin into money the blood of the Conversos.?. With his death, 
however, came a speedy return to the bad old ways. Adrian of 
Utrecht, though well-intentioned, was weak and confiding. 
When appointed Inquisitor-general of Aragon, he had made 
Calcena, February 12, 1517, secretary of that Suprema and, 
after the death of Ximenes we find Calcena acting, in 1518, as 
royal secretary of the reunited Inquisition, a position which he 
shared with Ugo de Urries, Lord of Ayerbe, another appointee 
of Adrian’s, who long retained that position under Charles V. 
Aguirre had the same good fortune, having been appointed by 
Adrian to membership in the Suprema of Aragon and resuming 
his position in the reunited Inquisition after the death of Ximenes. 
His name occurs as signed to documents as late as 1546, when 
he seems to be the senior member.’ 

Ferdinand’s dying exhortation to his grandson was needed. 
Charles V, a youth of seventeen, was as clay in the hands of 
the potter, surrounded by grasping Flemish favorites, whose sole 
object, as far as concerned Spain, was to sell their influence to 


1 Mariana, Hist. de Espafia, T. IX, Append. p. lvi (Valencia, 1796). 

? Gomesii de Rebus Fr. Ximenii, fol. 173.—Cartas de Jimenez, p. 190 (Madrid, 
1867). 

3 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 3, fol. 448; Libro 4, fol. 143, 152; 
Libro 9, passim; Libro 926, fol. 76, 166; Libro 940, fol. 59. 


916 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Book I 


the highest bidder. During the interval before his coming to 
take possession of his new dominions, he fluctuated in accordance 
with the pressure which happened momentarily to be strongest. 
The Spaniards who came to his court gave fearful accounts of 
the Inquisition, which they said was ruining Spain, and we are 
told that his counsellors were mostly Conversos who had obtained 
their positions by purchase.’ In his prologue to his subsequent 
abortive project of reform, Charles says that while in Flanders 
he received many complaints about the Inquisition, which he 
submitted to famous men of learning and to colleges and uni- 
versities, and his proposed action was in accordance with their 
advice.? Ximenes was alive to the danger and it was doubtless 
by his impulsion that the Council of Castile wrote to Charles 
that the peace of the kingdom and the maintenance of his 
authority depended on his support of the Inquisition.* A more 
adroit manceuvre was the advantage which he took of the death, 
June 1, 1516, of Bishop Mercader, Inquisitor-general of Aragon. 
It would probably not have been difficult for him to have re- 
united the Inquisitions of the two crowns under his own headship, 
but he took the more politic course of urging Charles to nominate 
his old tutor, Adrian of Utrecht, then in Spain, as his repre- 
sentative, and to secure for him the succession to Mercader’s 
see of Tortosa. Charles willingly followed the advice; July 30th 
he replied that in accordance with it he had written to Rome 
for the commission; November 14th Pope Leo commissioned 
Adrian as Inquisitor-general of Aragon, and we shall see here- 
after how complete was the ascendancy which he exercised over 
Charles in favor of the Holy Office.‘ 

Meanwhile Charles continued to vacillate. At one time he 
proposed to banish from his court all those of Jewish blood, and 
sent a list of names in cypher with instructions to report their 
genealogies, to which the Suprema of Aragon replied, October 
27, 1516, with part of the information, promising to furnish the 
rest and expressing great gratification at his promises of aid and 
support in all things. Then there came a rumor that he proposed 


1 Bergenroth, Spanish State Papers, II, 281.—Cartas de los Secretarios de 
Cisneros, p. 209 (Madrid, 1876). 

? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 13, fol. 68. 

3 Ibidem, Libro 21, fol. 111. 

4 Llorente, Afiales, II, 94.—Cartas del Cardenal Jimenez, p. 115.—Gachard, 
Correspondance de Charles-Quint avec Adrian VI, p. 235 (Bruxelles 1859). 

5 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 921, fol. 38. 


i i i et 


Cap. IV] COMPLAINTS OF THE CORTES 217 


to abolish the suppression of the names of witnesses, which was 
one of the crowning atrocities of inquisitorial procedure. For 
this there must have been some foundation for, March 11, 1517, 
Ximenes sent to his secretary Ayala a commission as procurator 
of the Inquisition at Charles’s court, with full power to resist 
any attempt to restrict or impede it, and he followed this, March 
17th, with a letter to Charles, more vigorous than courtly, telling 
him that such a measure would be the destruction of the Inqui- 
sition and would cover his name with infamy; Ferdinand and 
_ Isabella, when in straits for money during the war with Granada, 
had refused 1,200,000 ducats for such a concession, and Ferdinand 
had subsequently rejected an offer of 400,000." 

It can readily be imagined that, in spite of the character of 
Ximenes, the death of Ferdinand and the uncertainty as to the 
views of the distant sovereign had sensibly diminished the awe 
felt for the Inquisition. There is an indication of this in a com- 
plaint made by the Suprema, in September, 1517, that, when it 
moved with the court from place to place, the alcaldes of the 
palace refused to furnish mules and wagons to transport its 
books and papers and personnel, or, at most, only did so after 
all the other departments of the government had been supplied.” 
There is significance also in a tumult occurring in Orihuela, in 
1517, when the inquisitors of Cartagena made a visitation there, 
obliging the Licenciado Salvatierra to invoke the royal inter- 
vention.* The Conversos, though decimated and impoverished, 
still had money and influence and the abuses which Ximenes 
had not been able to eradicate still excited hostility. When 
Charles, after his arrival in Spain, in September, 1517, held his 
first Cértes at Valladolid in 1518, the deputies petitioned him to 
take such order that justice should be done by the Inquisition, 
so that the wicked alone should be punished and the innocent 
not suffer; that the canons and the common law should be 
observed; that the inquisitors should be of gentle blood, of good 
conscience and repute and of the age required by law, and, 
finally, that episcopal Ordinaries should be judges in conformity 
with justice.‘ Although drawn in general terms this formal 
complaint indicates that the people felt the Holy Office to be 
an engine of oppression, for the furtherance of the private ends 


1 Tbidem, Libro 4, fol. 95; Libro 921, fol. 46. 
2 Ibidem, Libro 5, fol. 17. 3 Tbidem, Libro 10, fol. 50. 
4 Cértes de los antiguos Reinos de Leon y de Castilla, IV, 272. 


218 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Book L 


of the officials, to the disregard of law and justice. Charles made 
reply that he would consult learned and saintly men, with whose 
advice he would so provide that injustice should cease and 
meanwhile he would receive memorials as to abuses and projects 
of reform. The deputies made haste to give him ample informa- 
tion as to the tribulations of his subjects and the injury resulting 
to his dominions, and the outcome of the consultations of his 
advisers was a series of instructions to the officials of the Inquisi- 
tion which, if carried into effect, would have deprived the Holy 
Office of much of its efficiency for persecution as well as of its 
capacity for injustice. Peter Martyr tells us that the New 
Christians, to procure this, gave to the high chancellor, Jean le 
Sauvage, who was a thoroughly corrupt man, ten thousand 
ducats in hand, with a promise of ten thousand more when it 
should go into effect, but that, fortunately for the Inquisition, 
he fell sick towards the end of May and died early in July.* The 
Instructions had been finally engrossed and lacked only the 
signatures; they were drawn in the names of Charles and Juana 
and were addressed not only to the officials of the Inquisition 
but to those of the state and secular justice, but nothing more 
was heard of them, for the new chancellor, Mercurino di Gat- 
tinara, was a man of different stamp, and Charles as yet was 
swayed by the influences surrounding him. The elaborate 
project is therefore of no interest except as an acknowledgement, 
in its provisions for procedure, of the iniquity of the inquisitorial 
process as we shall see it hereafter, and, in its prohibitory clauses, 
that existing abuses exaggerated in every way the capacity for 
evil of the system as practised. Thus it prohibited that the 
salaries of the inquisitors should be dependent on the confisca- 
tions and fines which they pronounced, or that grants should be 
made to them from confiscated property or benefices of those 
whom they condemned, or that sequestrated property should be 
granted away before the condemnation of its owners; that 
inquisitors and officials abusing their positions should be merely 
transferred to other places instead of being duly punished; that 
those who complained of the tribunals should be arrested and 
maltreated; that those who appealed to the Suprema should be 


1 Pet. Mart. Epistt., 620, 622. 

Las Casas however gives to le Sauvage the highest character for intelligence 
and rectitude. He also speaks highly of Gattinara.—Hist. de las Indias, Lib. III, 
cap. 99, 103, 130 (Coleccion de Documentos, LXV, 366, 388; LXVI, 35). 


Cuap. IV] OFFERS OF THE NEW CHRISTIANS 219 


maltreated; that inquisitors should give information to those 
seeking grants as to the property of prisoners still under trial;. 
that prisoners under trial should be debarred from hearing mass 
and receiving the sacraments; that those condemned to perpetual 
prison should be allowed to die of starvation. The general tenor 
of these provisions indicate clearly what a tremendous stimulus 
to persecution and injustice was confiscation as a punishment 
of heresy, how the whole business of the Inquisition was degraded 
from its ostensible purpose of purifying the faith into a vile 
_ system of spoliation, and how those engaged in it were inevitably. 
vitiated by the tempting opportunity of filthy gains. 

Although Charles, on the death of his chancellor, dropped the 
proposed reform, he seems to have recognized the existence of 
these evils. When his Inquisitor-general, Cardinal Adrian, was 
elevated to the papacy in 1522, he sent from Flanders his 
chamberlain La Chaulx to congratulate him before he should 
leave Spain, and among the envoy’s instructions was the sug- 
gestion that he should be careful in his appointments and _ pro- 
vide proper means to prevent the Inquisition from punishing the 
innocent and its officials from thinking more about the property 
of the condemned than the salvation of their souls—a pious 
wish but perfectly futile so long as the methods of the institution 
were unchanged, and its expenses were to be met and its officials 
enriched by fines and confiscations.’ 

The sufferers had long recognized this and offers had more than 
once been vainly made to Ferdinand to compound for the royal 
right of confiscation—offers of which we know no details. With 
the failure of the comprehensive scheme of reform, this plan was 
revived and, before Charles left Spain, May 21, 1520, to assume 
the title of King of the Romans, a formal proposition was made 
to him to the effect that if justice should be secured in the Inquisi- 
tion, by appointing judges free from suspicion who should observe 
the law, so that the innocent might live secure and the wicked 
be punished and the papal ordinances be obeyed, there were 
persons who would dare to serve him as follows. Considering 
that greed is the parent of all evils; that it is the law of the 
Partidas that the property of those having Catholic children 
should not be confiscated* and further that the royal treasury 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 13, fol. 68-73. 
2 C. v. Hofler, Papst Adrian VI, p. 144 (Wien, 1880). 
8 This it rather assumed than expressed in Part. vu, Tit. xxvi, ley 3 


220 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


derived very little profit from the confiscations, as they were all 
consumed in the salaries and costs of the judges and receivers 
who enriched themselves, his Majesty could well benefit himself 
by a composition and sale of all his rights therein, for himself and 
his descendants for ever, obtaining from the pope a bull prohibit- 
ing confiscations and pecuniary penances and fines. If this 
were done the parties pledged themselves to provide rents 
sufficient, with those that Ferdinand had assigned towards that 
purpose, to defray all the salaries and costs of the Inquisition, 
on a basis to be defined by Charles. Moreover, they would pay 
him four hundred thousand ducats—one hundred thousand before 
his departure and the balance in three equal annual payments 
at the fair of Antwerp in May. Or, if he preferred not to do 
this in perpetuity, he could limit the term, for which two hundred 
thousand ducats would be paid, in similar four instalments. For 
the collection of the sum to meet these engagements there must 
be letters and provisions such as the Catholic king gave for the 
compositions of Andalusia, and it must be committed in Castile 
to the Archbishop of Toledo (Cardinal de Croy), and in Aragon 
to the Archbishop of Saragossa (Alfonso de Aragon) from whose 
decisions there was to be no appeal. But to furnish the necessary 
personal security for the fulfilment of this offer, it was significantly 
added that it would be necessary for the king and Cardinal 
Adrian to give safe-conducts to the parties, protecting them 
from prosecution by the Inquisition and these must be issued 
in the current month of October so that there might be time to 
raise the money.’ It is scarce necessary to say that this propo- 
sition was unsuccessful. Charles was under the influence of 
Cardinal Adrian and Adrian was controlled by his colleagues. 
It was asking too much of inquisitors that they should agree to 
allow themselves to be restricted to the impartial administration 
of the cruel laws against heresy, to be content with salaries and 
forego the opportunities of peculation. It was also in vain that 
the Cortes of Corufia, in 1520, repeated the request of those of 
Valladolid for a reform in procedure.? Charles sailed for Flanders 
leaving his subjects exposed to all the evils under which they 
had groaned so long. There were still occasional ebullitions of 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Patronato Real, Inquisicion, Leg. tinico, fol. 49. See 
Appendix. 

? Colmeiro, Cortes de los antiguos Reinos de Leon y Castilla, II, 110 (Madrid, 
1884). 


a = eee i 


Cuap. IV] OFFERS OF THE NEW CHRISTIANS 221 


resistance for, in 1520, when the tribunal of Cuenca arrested 
the deputy corregidor it gave rise to serious troubles and Inquis- 
itor Mariano of Toledo was despatched thither with his servants 
and familiars to restore peace, a task which occupied him for 
five months.’ 

A still further project for mitigating the rigors of the Inquisition 
was laid before Charles in 1520, apparently after his arrival in 
Flanders. This proposed no payment, but suggested that the 
expenses should be defrayed by the crown, which should wholly 
withdraw the confiscations from the control of the inquisitors. 
With this were connected various reforms in procedure—reveal- 
ing the names of witnesses, allowing the accused to select his 
advocate and to see his friends and family in presence of the 
gaoler, the punishment of false witness by the talio, the support 
of wife and children during the trial from the sequestrated 
property and some others.” There would seem also, about 1522, 
to have been a further offer to Charles of seven hundred thousand 
ducats for the abandonment of confiscation, but it does not 
appear what conditions accompanied it.2 It was all useless. 
The grasp of the Inquisition on Spain was too firm and its routine 
too well established for modification. 

In the revolt of the Comunidades, which followed the departure 
of Charles, the affairs of the Inquisition had no participation. 
Some ten years later, however, in 1531, the tribunal of Toledo 
came upon traces of an attempt to turn the popular movement 
to account in removing one of the atrocities of inquisitorial 
procedure. The treasurer, Alfonso Gutiérrez, is said to have 
spent in Rome some twelve thousand ducats in procuring a 
papal brief which removed the seal of secrecy from prisons and 
witnesses. He endeavored to secure for his scheme the favor of 
Juan de Padilla, the popular leader, by a loan of eight hundred 
ducats on the pledge of a gold chain, but Padilla, while accepting 
the loan, prudently refused to jeopardize his cause by arousing 
inquisitorial hostility.’ 

What Gutiérrez failed to obtain was sought for again from 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 5, fol. 24. 

? From the Brussels Archives de Etat, Registre sur le faict des hérésies et in- 
quisiteurs, fol. 652. Kindly communicated to me by Professor Paul Fredericq. 

3 Archivo de Simancas, Patronato Real, Inquisicion, Leg. tinico, fol. 35. 

4 Biblioteca ptiblica de Toledo, Sala 5, Estante 11, Tabla 3.—See also Padre 
Fidel Fita in Boletin, XX XIII, 307. 


222 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


Charles V in 1526. About this time commenced the efforts to 
subject the Moriscos of Granada to the Holy Office and apparently 
in preparation for this Granada was separated from Cérdova 
and was favored with a tribunal of its own, transferred thither 
from Jaen. The frightened inhabitants made haste to petition 
Charles to do away with the secrecy which was so peculiarly 
provocative of abuses. They pointed out that a judge, if licen- 
tiously disposed, had ample opportunity to work his will with 
the maidens and wives brought before him as prisoners and even 
with those merely summoned to appear, whose terror betrayed 
that they would dare to offer no resistance. In the same way 
the notaries and other subordinates, who were frequently un- 
married men, had every advantage with the wives and daughters 
of the prisoners, eagerly seeking to obtain some news of the 
accused, immured incomunicado in the secret prison, from which 
no word could escape, and ready, in their despairing anxiety, to 
make any sacrifice to learn his fate. Or, if the officials preferred, 
they could sell information for money and all this was so gener- 
ally understood that these positions were sought by evil-minded 
men in order to gratify their propensities. Bad as was this, still 
worse was the suppression of the witnesses’ names in procuring 
the conviction of the innocent while facilitating the escape of 
the guilty. The memorial assumes, what was practically the 
fact, that the only defence of the accused lay in guessing the 
names of the adverse witnesses and discrediting and disabling 
them for mortal enmity, and it pointed out how, in diverse 
ways, this facilitated miscarriage of justice. It did not confine 
itself to argument, however, but added that the little kingdom 
of Granada would pay fifty thousand ducats for the removal 
of secrecy from the procedure and prisons of the Inquisition, 
and that a very large sum could be thus obtained from the 
other provinces of Spain.t The only possible answer to the 
reasoning of the memorial was that the faith would suffer by 
any change, but this always sufficed and the Inquisition con- 
tinued to shroud its acts in the impenetrable darkness which 
served to cover up iniquity and give ample scope for injustice. 


When Charles had returned to Spain and again held the 
Cértes at Valladolid, in 1523, they repeated the petitions of 


* Archivo de Simancas, Patronato Real, Inquisicion, Leg, tinico, fol. 55.—See 
Appendix. 


Cuap. IV] NAVARRE 223 


1518 and 1520, adding that nothing had been done. They further 
suggested that inquisitors should be paid salaries by the king 
and not draw their pay from the proceeds of their functions, 
‘and that false witnesses should be punished in accordance with 
the Laws of Toro. This shows that the old abuses were felt 
as acutely as ever, but Charles merely replied that he had asked 
the pope to commission as inquisitor-general the Archbishop of 
Seville, Manrique, whom he had especially charged to see that 
justice was properly administered. Again, in 1525, the Cortes 
of Toledo complained of the excesses of the inquisitors and the 
disorders committed by the familiars and asked that the secular 
judges might be empowered to restrain abuses, but they obtained 
only a vague promise that, if abuses existed, he would have 
them corrected. It required no little courage for deputies to 
arraign the Inquisition publicly in the Cértes, and it is not 
surprising that the hardihood to do so disappeared with the 
recognition of the fruitlessness of remonstrance. 

Thus all efforts proved futile to mitigate or ameliorate inquisi- 
torial methods, and the Holy Office, in its existing form, was 
firmly established in Castile for three centuries momentous to 
the Spanish people. 


NAVARRE. 


When Ferdinand, in 1512, made the easy conquest of Navarre 
he presumably no longer had hope of issue by his Queen Ger- 
maine, to whom he could leave the kingdoms of his crown of 
Aragon. To avoid, therefore, for the new territory the limita- 
tions on sovereignty imposed by the Aragonese fueros, in the 
Cértes of Burgos, in 1515, he caused Navarre to be incorporated 
with the crown of Castile Its Inquisition thus finally became 
Castilian, although at first it was scarce more than a branch of 
that of Saragossa. 

When the Castilian invaders under the Duke of Alva occupied 


ii Cértes de los antiguos Reinos de Leon y de Castilla, IV, 381, 415. 
_ ? Mariana, Hist. de Espafia, Lib. xxx, cap. xxiv.—Galindez Carvajal, Memo- 
rial,-ann. 1515:(Col. de Doc. XVIII, 336) 


224 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION {[Boox I 


Pampeluna they found there the Dominican friar, Antonio de 
Maya, armed with a commission as inquisitor, issued by his 
provincial and confirmed by the pope. The office had doubtless 
been a sinecure under the House of Albret, but the transfer of 
the land to the Catholic king gave promise of its future useful- 
ness, for the little kingdom had served as an asylum for refugees 
from the rest of Spain. The good fraile lost no time in obtaining 
from Alva permission to exercise his office and in despatching 
an envoy to Ferdinand at Logrofio to secure the royal confirma- 
tion and suggest the necessity of appointing a staff of salaried 
officials. Besides, the episcopal vicar-general of Pampeluna 
was seeking to exercise the office, and the king was asked to 
order him not to interfere. Ferdinand, with his usual caution, 
wrote on September 30, 1512, to the Duke of Alva, as captain- 
general, and to the Bishop of Majorca as governor, expressing 
his earnest desire to forward the good work and desiring infor- 
mation as to the character of Maya; meanwhile, if the inquisitors 
of Saragossa sent to claim fugitives, they were to be promptly 
surrendered. 

No further action was taken for a year, during which Fray 
Maya did what he could in the absence of assistance. At length 
a royal letter of September 26, 1513, to the Marquis of Comares, 
lieutenant and captain-general, announced that Inquisitor- 
general Mercader had appointed as inquisitors Francisco Gon- 
zilez de Fresneda, one of the inquisitors of Saragossa, and Fray 
Antonio de Maya, to whom the customary oath of obedience 
was to be taken; the only other official designated was Jaime 
Julian, as escribano de secuestras, with a salary of 2500 sueldos. 
Further delays, however, occurred and, on December 21st, the 
king wrote to Fresneda to lose no time in going to Pampeluna. 
with his officials, where he would find Maya awaiting him. On 
the 24th a proclamation announced that Leo X had ordered 
the continuance of the Inquisition in all the kingdoms of Spain 
and especially in that of Navarre, wherefore in order that dread 
of loss of property might not deter those conscious of guilt from 
coming forward and confessing, the king granted release from 
confiscation to all who would confess and apply for recon- 
ciliation within the Term of Grace of thirty days which the 
inquisitors would announce. As a preparation for those who 
should disregard this mercy, already, on the 22d, Martin Adrian 
had been commissioned to the important office of receiver of 


Cuap. IV] NAVARRE 225 


the confiscations which were expected to supply the funds for 
the machinery of persecution and, on January 1, 1514, he was 
empowered to pay himself a salary of 6000 sueldos and one of 
3000 to Fray Maya. As nothing is said about the salaries of the 
other officials, they presumably were carried on the pay-roll of 
the tribunal of Saragossa. The process of manning the new 
Inquisition was conducted with great deliberation. It was not 
until July 18, 1514, that receiver Adrian was informed that 
Bishop Mercader had appointed Juan de Villena as fiscal, or 
_ prosecuting officer, to whom a salary of 2500 sueldos was to be 
paid. The close connection of the tribunal of Pampeluna with 
that of Aragon is seen in the fact that Adrian was also notary 
of the Inquisition of Calatayud and continued in service there 
for which he received his accustomed salary. Juan de Miades, 
also, the alguazil of Saragossa, was put in charge of the prison 
at Pampeluna, for which he was allowed an additional salary of 
500 sueldos, until, October 15, 1515, Bernardino del Campo, 
of Saragossa, was appointed gaoler at Pampeluna with a salary of 
500 sueldos. We also hear of Miguel Daoyz, notary del secreto 
of Saragossa acting for the Inquisition of Pampeluna. This 
may partly be attributable to Ferdinand’s policy, as expressed, 
March 23, 1514, in a letter to the Marquis of Comares, that the 
officials must not be Navarrese, for he had elsewhere experienced 
the disadvantage of employing natives. More urgent, however, 
was the pressure of economy, for the Pampeluna Inquisition 
had apparently little to do; Navarre had never had a population 
of Moors and Jews comparable to that of the southern kingdoms 
and the refugees there doubtless hastened their departure as 
soon as the shadow of the Inquisition spread over the land, 
although one of the earliest orders of Ferdinand to Comares, 
December 21, 1513, had been to place guards secretly at all 
ports and passes to prevent their escape. How little material 
existed for the Holy Office is manifested by the fact that the 
confiscations did not pay the very moderate expenses and in 
May, 1515, it was necessary to transfer from Valencia two 
hundred ducats to enable Martin Adrian to meet the necessary 
charges. In September, 1514, we find the inquisitors making 
a visitation of their district and, in the following month, Fray 
Maya returned to the seclusion of his convent, but of the actual 
work of the tribunal we hear little. It is true that a letter of 
the Suprema, October 11, 1516, respecting the collection of a 
15 


226 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INQUISITION [Boox I 


penance of 300 ducats imposed on Miguel de Sant Jaime shows 
that occasionally a lucrative prize was secured, but chances of 
this kind must have been few for, in 1521, Cardinal Adrian, in view 
of the necessities of the tribunal, ruthlessly cut down the salaries 
of all the officials. Its authority cannot have been well assured 
for, in 1518, the Viceroy, Duke of Najera, expresses doubts 
whether a sentence of sanbenitos, pronounced on Rodrigo de 
Osca and his wife, of Pampeluna, can be enforced, in view of 
their numerous kindred, to which the Suprema replies by instruct- 
ing him to see that nothing is allowed to impede it. Little as 
it had to do, the business of the tribunal was delayed by its 
imperfect organization. In 1519 eight citizens of Pampeluna 
complained to the Suprema that, for trifling causes, their fathers 
and mothers, wives and brothers, were in the prison of the 
Inquisition, where three of them had died and the rest were 
sick. They had been detained for seven or eight months, although 
their cases were finished, awaiting consultores from Saragossa 
to vote on them, wherefore the petitioners asked that decisions 
‘be reached without further delay and that, when discharged, the 
‘prisoners should not be ruined by pecuniary penances greater than 
their substance, as had occurred on previous occasions. The 
Suprema, January 12, 1519, forwarded this petition to the inquisi- 
tors with instructions that, within fifteen days, one of them should 
‘bring to Saragossa all the cases concluded, to be duly voted on, 
while the remainder were to be finished as soon as possible and 
within fifteen days thereafter to be similarly brought to Saragossa 
for decision. As in this letter the Council describes itself as 
‘entrusted with the business of the Inquisition in all the kingdoms 
-and lordships of the crown of Aragon and Navarre, it shows 
that the latter still remained subject to the section of the Suprema 
pertaining to Aragon. 

While the tribunal of Pampeluna was thus of little service 
‘for its ostensible objects, it was turned to account politically 
in the perturbations which followed the death of Ferdinand, 
January 23, 1516. Jean d’Albret, supported by France, natu- 
rally made an effort to recover his dominions, but his ineffective 
siege of Saint-Jean-Pied-du-Port, and the defeat and capture of 
‘the Marshal of Navarre at Roncesvalles, speedily put an end to 
the invasion. It was important for the Spanish government 
to ascertain the extent to which assistance had been pledged to 
him by his former subjects. The Inquisition was unpopular 


Cuap. IV] NAVARRE 227 


among them and would undoubtedly have been overthrown had 
d’Albret succeeded, so that an investigation into those con- 
cerned in the movement could come within an elastic definition 
of its functions, while its methods fitted it admirably to obtain 
the information desired. Accordingly a cédula of April 21, 1516, 
instructed the inquisitors to spare no effort, in every way, to 
discover the names of those engaged in the affair and to obtain 
all the information they could about the whole matter. This 
probably did not increase the popularity of the Holy Office and 
the French invasion of 1521 offered an opportunity, which was 
not neglected, of expressing in action the hostility of the people. 
After the expulsion of the enemy, reprisals were in order which 
Cardinal Adrian committed to the Precentor of Tudela. Appar- 
ently he was not sufficiently vigorous in the work for, in 1523, 
we find the Suprema stimulating him to greater activity.’ 

Spanish domination being thus assured, the Navarrese tribunal 
became useful chiefly as a precaution to prevent the subject 
kingdom from continuing to be an asylum for heretics. It had 
been shifted from Pampeluna to Estella and thence to Tudela, 
where, in 1518, the Suprema instructs the inquisitors to find a 
suitable building, in order to relieve the monastery of San Fran- 
cisco in which the tribunal was temporarily lodged. Some years 
later there was talk of returning it to Pampeluna, but finally it 
was recognized as having a district inadequate to its support, 
while the monarchy felt itself strong enough to disregard the 
old boundaries of nationality. At some time prior to 1540, 
Calahorra, with a portion of Old Castile, was detached from the 
enormous district of Valladolid and was made the seat of a 
tribunal of which the jurisdiction extended over Navarre and 
Biscay. About 1570 this was transferred to Logrofio, on the 
boundary between Old Castile and Navarre, and there it re- 
mained, as we shall have occasion to see, until the dissolution 
of the Holy Office.’ 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 3, fol. 199, 200, 256, 259, 263, 267, 
268, 271, 299, 311, 337, 339, 341, 344, 348, 352, 353, 354, 368, 392, 438, 449; 
Libro 72, P. 1, fol. 49, P. 2, fol. 47; Libro 73, fol. 193, 276; Libro 74, fol. 116; 
Libro 75, fol. 6. 

2 Thid. Libro 72, P. 2, fol. 116; Libro 73, fol. 142, 247-8; Libro 78, fol. 216, 
226, 285; Libro 82, fol. 5. 


AA 


ied 


rs 


8 at | mee eo) oe eae 
i 
o 


we) eee: 
i t i i 
' : et : - r 
; by fh ‘% '- 
i d 
j 
f Gears & cae i 
; a+ ee Y ¥ 
i4) i 
J 
. i ie ' 
id 3 i i 
a 3 i A th ' 


Me a Fy 
. ; Cae o" 
a wih anit 
3 ‘ 
4 
é f { beens 
F : 
Fac S ‘ a 
an : F 
os is ‘ 
148 i F 
1 - = 
ox i no by 42 
BN i “yy , 
=e ' 
«= s , f 3 is 
‘ é i 9 
re MeN 
‘“, ih 
a ei 
H ro’ ts 4 
Cear i ris 3 
{ ake ) ans 
ya wa ENA of, 
an ‘ da } 
ee AAS 
a ys 
-. ; / 
ad Ld P oF 
wea) 


a 


HAS PN eee ea Meee 
ES EA Ba 


} } + 
wf | 
x ws rik? | 
i 
’ pe Lee 
Nasa feo 
, 
i 
- 
ia i 
om . 
»* tue * 


CHAR TE RV. 
THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON. 


THe Crown of Aragon comprised the so-called kingdoms of 
Aragon and Valencia, the principality of Catalonia, the counties 
of Rosellon and Cerdafia, and the Balearic Isles, with the out- 
lying dependencies of Sicily, Sardinia and Corsica. Although 
marriage had united the sovereigns of Castile and Aragon, the 
particularism born of centuries of rivalry and frequent war kept 
the lands jealously apart as separate nations and Ferdinand ruled 
individually his ancestral dominions. What had been accom- 
plished in Castile for the Inquisition had therefore no effect across 
the border and the extension of the Spanish organization there 
was complicated by the character of the local institutions and the 
fact that the papal Inquisition was already in existence there 
since its foundation in the middle of the thirteenth century. 

Aragon had not undergone the dissolving process of Castilian 
anarchy which enabled Ferdinand and Isabella to build up an 
absolute monarchy on the ruins of feudalism. Its ancient rights 
and liberties had been somewhat curtailed during the tyrannical 
reigns of Ferdinand of Antequera and his successors, but enough 
remained to render the royal power nominal rather than real and 
the people were fiercely jealous of their independence. The Cértes 
were really representative bodies which insisted upon the redress 
of grievances before voting supplies and, if we may believe the 
Venetian envoy, Giovanni Soranzo, in 1565, the ancient formula 
of the oath of allegiance was still in use: ‘* We, who are as good 
as you, swear to you who are no better than we, as to the prince 
and heir of our kingdom, on condition that you preserve our 
liberty and laws and if you do otherwise we do not swear to you.” 


? Relazioni Venete, Serie I, T. V, p. 85. 

This is virtually the same as the formula given by Antonio Pérez in his Rela- 
ciones, written in 1598: “Nos que valemos tanto como vos os hazemos nuestro’ 
Rey y Sefior con tal que nos guardeys nuestros fueros y libertades y sino No!” 
(Obras, Ed. 1654, p. 163). The learned Javier de Quinto (Discursos politicos, 
Madrid, 1848) had not seen Soranzo’s statement when he proved that this 
formula was invented by Hotman in his Franco Gallia, first printed in 1573. On 

( 229 ) 


230 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


In dealing with a people whose liberties were so extensive and 
whose jealousy as to their maintenance was so sensitive, Ferdi- 
nand was far too shrewd to provoke opposition by the abrupt 
introduction of the Inquisition such as he had forced upon Cas- 
tile. His first endeavor naturally was to utilize the institution 
as it had so long existed. This, although founded as early as 
1238, had sunk into a condition almost dormant in the spiritual 
lethargy of the century preceding the Reformation, and in Aragon, 
as in the rest of Europe, it appeared to be on the point of extinc- 
tion. Itis true that, in 1474, Sixtus IV had ordered Fra Leonardo, 
the Dominican General, to fill all the tribunals of the Holy Office 
and he had complied by appointing Fray Juan as Inquisitor of 
Aragon, Fray Jaime for Valencia, Fray Juan for Barcelona and 
Fray Francisco Vital for Catalonia, but we have no record of their 
activity.’ So little importance, indeed, was attached to the 
functions of the Inquisition that in Valencia, where in 1480 
the Dominicans Cristébal de Gualbes and Juan Orts were inquisi- 
tors, they held faculties enabling them to act without the con- 
currence of the episcopal representative—an unexampled privilege, 
only explicable on the assumption that the archbishop declined 
to be troubled with matters so trivial. The archbishop at the 
time was Cardinal Rodrigo Borgia, papal vice-chancellor, better 
known as Alexander VI, who speedily woke up to the speculative 
value of his episcopal jurisdiction over heresy, when the fierce 
persecution, which arose in Andalusia in January, 1481, with its 
attendant harvest of fines and compositions, showed that a 
similar prospect might be anticipated in his own province. 
Accordingly a brief of Sixtus IV, December 4, 1481, addressed 
to the inquisitors, withdrew their faculties of independent action 
and went to the other extreme by directing them in future to do 
nothing without the concurrence of the vicar-general, Mateo 
Mercader, senior archdeacon of Valencia.’ 


the other hand there is nothing of the kind in the oath of allegiance taken to 
Charles V in 1518, though he was obliged first to swear to observe the fueros 
and privileges of the land——Argensola, Afiales de Aragon, Lib. I, cap. lx. 

A good account of the ancient constitution of Aragon will be found in Swift’s 
‘Life and Times of James the First, King of Aragon,” London, 1894. 

1 Monteiro, Historia da Santa Inquisicaé, II, 340. 

2 Archivio Vaticano, Sisto IV, Registro 674, T. XV, fol. 13. 

Even in the dormant condition of the Inquisition, there must have been some 
opportunities rendering the office of inquisitor desirable. A brief of Sixtus IV, 
Jan. 21, 1479 (Ripoll, III, 572), to the Dominican General, recites that his prede- 


: 


Cuap. V] REVIVAL OF OLD INQUISITION 231 


In reviving and stimulating to activity this papal institution, 
Ferdinand was fully resolved to have it subjected to the crown as 
completely as in Castile. Hitherto it had been a Dominican 
province, with inquisitors holding office at the pleasure of the 
Dominican authorities and his first step therefore was to procure, 
in 1481, from the Dominican General, Salvo Caseta, a commission 
to Fray Gaspar Juglar to appoint and dismiss inquisitors at the 
royal will and pleasure.* This gave him control over the per- 
sonnel of the Inquisition, but to render it completely dependent 


and at the same time efficient, it was necessary that the appoint- 


ees should be well paid and that the pay should come from the 
royal treasury. A hundred years earlier, Eymerich, the Inquisi- 
tor of Aragon, had sorrowfully recorded that princes were unwill- 
ing to defray the expenses, because there were no rich heretics 
left whose confiscations excited their cupidity; the Church was 
equally disinclined, so that, in the absence of regular financial 
support, the good work languished.” Now, however, greed and 
fanaticism joined hands at the prospect of wealthy Conversos to 
be punished and Ferdinand, by a rescript of February 17, 1482, 
provided ample salaries for the manning of the tribunal of Valen- 
cia, with all the necessary officials.* We may reasonably assume 


cessor had appointed, some years previously, Jaime Borell as inquisitor of 
Valencia, who had recently been removed without cause by Miguel de Mariello, 
Provincial of Aragon, and replaced by Juan Marques. Sixtus now orders Marques 
ejected and Borell restored. Neither of these names appear in the documents of 
the period. 

1 Archivo general de la Corona de Aragon, Registro 3684, fol. 7, 8. 

2 Eymeric. Direct. Inquis. P. III, Q. eviii. 

3 Arch. Gen. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 9. This quaint document shows us 
the primitive organization of a tribunal and the salaries regarded as ample. 
There are apparently two clerical errors which balance each other, in the salaries 
of the inquisitors and scrivener. 

“‘La forma infra sequent es la voluntat nostra ques tenga en la solucio e paga 
dels salaris dels officials e treballants en la officio de la Inquisicio. 

E primerament 4 cascu dels inquisidors que son dos, 


cent quaranta lliures cascun any que sumen . . . CLXxXx Ilrs. 
Item 4 un bon jurista que sia advocat dels inquisidors 

e advocat fiscal, cinquanta lliureslany . . . . L lirs. 
Item al procurador fiscal vint e cinch lliureslany . . Xxv Ilrs. 
Item al scriva de la inquisicio doscentes lliureslany .. cc llrs. 
Item al alguacil et al sag cente vintllures . . . . cxx Ilrs. 
Item al porter que va citant vint lliureslany . . . xx llrs. 
Item 4 Dominguez que reeb los actos de las confiscacions xxv llrs. 


Que sumen tots les dits quantitats sex cent vint lliures moneda reals de 


932 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


that he commenced there in the anticipation of meeting less 
obstinate resistance than in the older and stronger provinces of 
Aragon and Catalonia. He was, however, not yet fully satisfied 
with his control over appointments and he applied to Sixtus IV 
for some larger liberty, but the pope, who was beginning to recog- 
nize that the Castilian Inquisition was more royal than papal, 
refused, by a brief of January 29, 1482, alleging that to do so 
would be to inflict disgrace on the Dominicans to whom it had 
always been confided.’ 

The reorganized tribunal speedily produced an impression by 
its activity. The Conversos became thoroughly alarmed; opposi- 
tion began to manifest itself, while the more timid sought safety 
in flight. A certain Mossen Luis Masquo, one of the jurats of 
Valencia, made himself especially conspicuous in exciting the 
city against the inquisitors and in stimulating united action in 
opposition by the Estates of the kingdom. A letter to him from 
Ferdinand, February 8, 1482, censures him severely for this and 
vaguely threatens him with the royal wrath for persistence. 
Another letter of the same date to the Maestre Racional, or chief 
accounting officer of the kingdom, shows that the severity with 
which the property of those arrested was seized and sequestrated 
was arousing indignation, for it explains the necessity of this so 
that not a diner shall be lost; if the inquisitors have not power to 
do this, it shall be conferred on them.? The Maestre Racional 
had suggested that for those who should spontaneously come for- 
ward and confess a form of abjuration and reconciliation might be 
adopted which should spare them the humiliation of public 
penance while still keeping them subject to the penalties of 
relapse. To this, after consultation with learned canonists, Ferdi- 
nand assented and sent him the formula agreed upon, with 
instructions that it should appear to be the act of the local 
authorities and not his—doubtless to prevent his Castilian sub- 
jects from claiming the same exemption from the humiliating 
penitential processions in the autos de fe.* 

Allusions in this correspondence to special cases of arrests and 


Valencia, los quals e no mas es nostra voluntat que en la forma dessus dita se 
paguen 4 les sobredits persones. Dada en la vila de Medina del Campo 4 xvir 
dias de febrer del any dela nativitat de nostro senyor MCCCCLXXXII. Yo el 
Rey. Dominus Rex mandavit mihi Petro Camanyas.” 

1 Printed by Llorente, Hist. erft. Append. 1. 

2 Arch. Gen. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 3, 4. 

3 Tbidem, fol. 1, 2, 4, 5. 


Cap. V] PAPAL INTERFERENCE wo 


fugitives and sequestrations show that Ferdinand was succeeding 
in moulding the old Inquisition as he desired and that it was 
actively at work, when suddenly a halt was called. In the general 
terror it is presumable that the Conversos had recourse to the 
Holy See and furnished the necessary convincing arguments; it 
may also be conjectured that Sixtus was disposed, by throwing 
obstacles in the way, to secure the recognition of his profitable 
but disputed right to entertain appeals and that he was unwilling, 
without a struggle, to lose control of the Inquisition of Aragon 
-as he had done with that of Castile. There are traces also of the 
hand of Cardinal Borgia seeking to recover his episcopal juris- 
diction over heresy in Valencia. Whatever may have been the 
impelling cause, the first move of Sixtus was to cause the Domin- 
ican General, Salvo Caseta, to withdraw the commission given 
to Fray Gaspar Juglar to appoint inquisitors at Ferdinand’s 
dictation. At this the royal wrath exploded in a letter to the 
General, April 26, 1482, threatening the whole Order with the 
consequences of his displeasure; Gualbes and Orts had done their 
duty fearlessly and incorruptibly, while Fray Francisco Vital— 
appointed to Catalonia by the Dominican General—had been 
taking bribes and had been banished the kingdom; he will 
never allow inquisitors to act, except at his pleasure; even with 
the royal favor they can accomplish little in the face of popular 
opposition and without it they can do nothing; meanwhile 
Gualbes and Orts will continue to act. This heated epistle was 
followed, May 11th, by one in a calmer mood, asking that Juglar’s 
commission be renewed or another one be issued, failing which he 
would obtain papal authority and overslaugh the Dominican 
Order.’ 

The next move by Sixtus was the issue, April 18, 1482, of 
the most extraordinary bull in the history of the Inquisition— 
extraordinary because, for the first time, heresy was declared to 
be, like any other crime, entitled to a fair trial and simple justice. 
We shall have abundant opportunity to see hereafter how the 
inquisitorial system, observed since its foundation in the thir- 
teenth century, presumed the guilt of the accused on any kind 
of so-called evidence and was solely framed to extort a confession 
by depriving him of the legitimate means of defence and by the 
free use of torture. It was also an invariable rule that sacramental 
confession of heresy was good only in the forum of conscience and 


1 Arch. Gen. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 7, 8. 


234 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox 1 


was no bar to subsequent prosecution. There was brazen assurance 
therefore in Sixtus’s complaining that, for some time, the inquis- 
itors of Aragon had been moved not by zeal for the faith but by 
cupidity; that many faithful Christians, on the evidence of slaves, 
enemies and unfit witnesses, without legitimate proofs, had been 
thrust into secular prisons, tortured and condemned as heretics, 
their property confiscated and their persons relaxed to the secular 
arm for execution. In view of the numerous complaints reaching 
him of this, he ordered that in future the episcopal vicars should 
in all cases be called in to act with the inquisitors; that the names 
and evidence of accusers and witnesses should be communicated 
to the accused, who should be allowed counsel and that the evi- 
dence for the defence and all legitimate exceptions should be 
freely admitted; that imprisonment should be in the episcopal 
gaols; that for all oppression there should be free appeal to the 
Holy See, with suspension of proceedings, under pain of excom- 
munication removable only by the pope. Moreover, all who had 
been guilty of heresy should be permitted to confess secretly to 
the inquisitors or episcopal officials, who were required to hear 
them promptly and confer absolution, good in both the forum of 
conscience and that of justice, without abjuration, on their accept- 
ing secret penance, after which they could no longer be prose- 
cuted for any previous acts, a certificate being given to them in 
which the sins confessed were not to be mentioned, nor were they 
to be vexed or molested thereafter in any way—and all this under 
similar pain of excommunication. The bull was ordered to be 
read in all churches and the names of those incurring censure 
under it were to be published and the censures enforced if neces- 
sary by invocation of the secular arm; while finally all proceed- 
ings in contravention of these provisions were declared to be null 
and void, all exceptions from excommunication were withdrawn 
and all conflicting papal decrees were set aside.! It is evident 
that the Conversos had a hand in framing this measure and they 
could scarce have asked for anything more favorable. In fact 
Ferdinand in December, 1482, writes to Luis Cabanilles, Governor 
of Valencia, that he learns that Gonsalvo de Gonsalvo Royz was 
concerned in procuring the bull for the Conversos: he is therefore 


1 Archivio Vaticano: Sisto IV, Regestro 674, T. XV, fol. 366. 

As Llorente states (Hist. erft. Append. n. 2) that the contents of this bull are 
unknown and as ignorance of its purport has wholly misled him, I give it in the 
Appendix. 


CHap. V] PAPAL INTERFERENCE 235 


to be arrested at once and is not to be released without a royal 
order, while Luis de Santangel, the royal escribano de racion, will 
convey orally the king’s intentions concerning him.’ 

In this elaborate and carefully planned decree Sixtus formally 
threw down the gage of battle to Ferdinand and announced that 
he must be placated in some way if the Inquisition of Aragon 
was to be allowed to perform its intended functions. That it was 
simply a tactical move—rendered doubly advantageous by liberal 
Converso payment—and that he is to be credited with no humani- 
-tarian motives, is sufficiently evident from his subsequent action 
and also from the fact that the bull was limited to Aragon and 
in no way interfered with the Castilian tribunals. Ferdinand 
promptly accepted the challenge. He did not await the publica- 
tion of the bull but addressed, on May 13th, a haughty and 
imperative letter to Sixtus. He had heard, he said, that such 
concessions had been made, which he briefly condensed in a 
manner to show that his information was accurate, and further 
that the inquisitors Gualbes and Orts had been removed, at the 
instance of the New Christians who hoped for more pliable suc- 
cessors. He refused to believe that the pope could have made 
grants so at variance with his duty but, if he had thus yielded to 
the cunning persuasions of the New Christians, he, the king, did 
not intend ever to allow them to take effect. If anything had 
been conceded it must be revoked; the management of the Inqui- 
sition must be left to him; he must have the appointment of the 
inquisitors, as only through his favor could they adequately per- 
form their functions; it was through lack of this royal power that 
they had hitherto been corrupted and had allowed heresy to 
spread. He therefore asked Sixtus to confirm Gualbes and Orts 
and the commission to Gaspar Juglar, or to give a similar com- 
mission to some other Dominican, for he would permit no one to 
exercise the office in his dominions except at his pleasure.’ 

Sixtus seems to have allowed five months to elapse before 
answering this defiance, but in the meanwhile the Inquisition 
went on as before. Ferdinand had formed in Valencia a special 


1 Archivo Gen. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 9.—It is significant that in the 
papal register there is a note appended to this bull “ Duplicata sub eadem data 
et scripta per eundem scriptorem et taxata ad xxx” [grossos?], showing that an 
authentic copy was obtained and paid for at the time by some one, doubtless to 
provide against accident or fraud. 

2 Arch. Gen. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 7. See Appendix. Bergenroth 
(Calendar of Spanish State Papers, I, xliv) gives an incorrect extract from it. 


236 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


council for the Holy Office and this body ventured to remonstrate 
with him about the confiscations and especially the feature of 
sequestration, by which, as soon as an arrest was made, the whole 
property of the accused was seized and held; this was peculiarly 
oppressive and the council represented that it violated the fueros 
granted by King Jaime and King Alfonso, but Ferdinand replied, 
September 11th, that he was resolved that nothing belonging to 
him should be lost but should be rigidly collected, while what 
belonged to others should not be taken. Another letter of Sep- 
tember 6th to the Governor Luis Cabanilles refers to an arrange- 
ment of a kind that became frequent, under which the Conversos 
agreed to pay a certain sum as a composition for the confiscations 
of those who might be proved to be heretics.’ 

At length, on October 9th, Sixtus replied to Ferdinand in a man- 
ner to show that he was open to accommodation. The new rules, 
he said, had been drawn up with the advice of the cardinals de- 
puted for the purpose; they had scattered in fear of the impending 
pestilence but, when they should return to Rome, he would charge 
them to consider maturely whether the bull should be amended; 
meanwhile he suspended it in so far as it contravened the common 
law, only charging the inquisitors to observe strictly the rules of 
the common law—the ‘‘common law’ here being an elastic 
expression, certain to be construed as the traditional inquisitorial 
system.” Thus the unfortunate Conversos of Aragon, as we shall 
see hereafter were those of Castile, were merely used as pawns in 
the pitiless game of king and pope over their despoilment and 
the merciful prescriptions of the bull of April 18th were only of 
service in showing that, in his subsequent policy, Sixtus sinned 
against light and knowledge. What negotiations followed, the 
documents at hand fail to reveal, but an understanding was 
inevitable as soon as the two powers could agree upon a division 
of the spoil. It required a twelvemonth to effect this and in the 
settlement Ferdinand secured more than he had at first demanded. 
It was no longer a question of commissioning a fraile to appoint 
inquisitors at his pleasure, but of including in the organization of 
the Castilian Inquisition the whole of the Spanish dominions. 
On October 17, 1483, the agreement was ratified by a bull appoint- 
ing Torquemada as inquisitor of Aragon, Valencia and Catalonia, 
with power to appoint subordinates. In this, with characteristic 


1 Arch. Gen. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 8, 9. 
2 Llorente, Hist. crit. Append. n. 2.—Fidel Fita (Boletin, XV, 467). 


Cuap. V] CRISTOBAL GUALBES Zon 


shamelessness, Sixtus declares that he is only discharging his duty 
as pope, while his tender care for the reputation of the Dominicans 
is manifested by his omitting to prescribe that the local inquisitors 
should be members of that Order, the only qualification required 
being that they should be masters in theology.’ 

During the interval, prior to this extension of Torquemada’s 
jurisdiction, there was an incident showing that Sixtus had 
yielded the appointment of inquisitors, while endeavoring to 
retain the power of dismissing them. Cristébal Gualbes, who was 
acting in Valencia to the entire satisfaction of Ferdinand, became 
involved in a bitter quarrel with the Archdeacon Mercader for 
whom, as we have seen, Cardinal Borgia had obtained a papal 
brief, virtually constituting him an indispensable member of the 
tribunal—a power which he doubtless used speculatively to the 
profit of Borgia and himself. It is to the interference of Gualbes 
with these worthies that we may reasonably attribute the action 
of Sixtus, who wrote, May 25, 1483, to Ferdinand and Isabella 
that the misdeeds of Gualbes merited heavy punishment, but he 
contented himself with removing him and asked them to fill his 
place with some fitting person on whom he in advance conferred 
the necessary powers. He evidently felt doubtful as to their 
acquiescence, for he wrote on the same day to Ifigo Archbishop 
of Seville, asking him to use his influence to induce the sovereigns 
to concur in this. Ferdinand was not inclined to abandon 
Gualbes for, in a letter of August 8th, he orders the Maestre 
Racional of Valencia to pay to ‘‘lo devot religios maestre Gualbes”’ 
forty libras to defray his expenses in coming to the king at Cér- 
dova and in order that he might without delay return to work.’ 
In the final settlement however Gualbes was sacrificed, for when 


1 Ripoll, III, 622—When Innocent VIII, by letters of February 11, 1486, 
confirmed or reappointed Torquemada, the qualification of his appointees was 
modified by requiring them to be fitting ecclesiastics, learned and God-fearing, 
provided that they were masters in theology or doctors or licentiates of laws or 
canons of cathedrals or, holding other church dignities.—Pdramo, p. 137. 

Ferdinand, July 9, 1485, had requested that the condition of holding grades 
in the church should not be insisted upon for there were few of such who were 
fitted for the work.—Arch. Gen. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 59. 

2 Arch. Gen. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 34.—Boletin, XV, 472.—Bulario de 
la Orden de Santiago, Lib. I, fol. 43. 

Zurita (Afiales, XX, xlix) is evidently in error in stating that Ferdinand, 
May 20, 1483, asked Sixtus to remove Gualbes and Orts. 
8 Arch. Gen. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 11. 


238 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boor I 


Torquemada was made Inquisitor-general of Aragon, Sixtus 
expressly forbade him from appointing that son of iniquity Cris- 
tdbal Gualbes who, for his demerits, had been interdicted from 
serving as inquisitor.’ 


If Ferdinand imagined that he had overcome the resistance of 
his subjects by placing them under the Castilian Inquisition with 
Torquemada at its head, he showed less than his usual sagacity. 
They had been restive under the revived institution conducted 
by their own people and the intense particularism of the Aragonese 
could not fail to arouse still stronger opposition to the prospect 
of subjection to the domination of a foreigner such as Torquemada, 
whose sinister reputation for pitiless zeal gave assurance that the 
work would be conducted with greater energy than ever. 

In Castile the introduction of the Inquisition had been done by 
the arbitrary power of the crown; in Aragon the consent of the 
representatives of the people was felt to be necessary for the 
change from the old to the new and a meeting of the Cértes was 
convoked at Tarazona for January 15, 1484. Ferdinand and 
Isabella arrived there on the 19th and remained until May, when 
the opening of the campaign against Granada required their 
presence elsewhere. Torquemada was there ready to establish 
the tribunals; what negotiations were requisite we do not know, 
though we hear of his consulting with persons of influence, and 
an agreement was reached on April 14th. It was not until May 
7th, however, that Ferdinand issued from Tarazona a cédula 
addressed to all the officials throughout his dominions, informing 
them that with his assent the pope had established the Inquisition 
to repress the Judaic and Mahometan heresies and ordering that 


* Ripoll, III, 622.—Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Lib. I, fol. 182. 

When he had no further use for Gualbes Ferdinand also turned against him, 
for in March, 1486, on hearing that Gualbes proposed to visit a Dominican con- 
vent he wrote earnestly to the Governor and Inquisitor of Valencia to prevent 
it as it would be a scandal.—Arch. Gen. de la C, de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 90. 

It is possible that there may have been some rancor on Ferdinand’s part against 
Gualbes who, as an eloquent preacher and fervid popular orator, had done much, 
in 1461, to stimulate the resistance of the Catalans to Juan II, after the death 
of the heir-apparent, Carlos Prince of Viana, which was attributed to poison 
administered by Queen Juana Henrfquez to open for her son Ferdinand the path. 
to the throne (Zurita, Afiales, Lib. xvi, cap. xxvi, xlii; Lib. xvi, cap. xxxii). 
It is true that Zurita is not certain whether there may not have been two 
Cristébal Gualbes (Lib. xx, cap. xlix) but Bofarull y Broca (Hist. de Catalufia, 
VI, 312) has no such doubts. 


Cuap. V] VALENCIA 239 


the inquisitors and their ministers should be honored and assisted 
everywhere under pain of the royal wrath, of deprivation of office 
and of ten thousand florins.’ 

Under the plenary powers of Torquemada’s commission, steps 
were taken to reorganize the Inquisition and adapt it to the active 
discharge of its duties. Tribunals were to be established perma- 
nently in Valencia, Saragossa and Barcelona with new men to 
conduct them. Gualbes was disposed of by the enmity of Sixtus 
IV. Orts still figures in an order for the payment of salaries, 
April 24, 1484, and, on May 10th, Ferdinand, writing from Tara- 
zona, says that he is there and will be sent to Saragossa, but he 
never appeared at the latter place, though he was not formally 
removed from office until February 8, 1486, by Innocent VIII, 
when he was styled Inquisitor of Valencia and Lérida.? 


VALENCIA. 


In the Spring of 1484 Torquemada appointed, for Valencia, 
Fray Juan de Epila and Martin Inigo, but the popular resistance 
and effervescence were such that their operations were greatly 
delayed. The jurats, or local authorities, prevented the opening 
of their tribunal and, by the advice of Miguel Dalman, royal advo- 
cate fiscal, presented an appeal to the Cortes of the kingdom, 
imploring their intervention. The Cortes had assembled and all 
four brazos or Estates united in remonstrances against the threat- 
ened violation of the fueros and privileges of the land and threw 
every impediment in the way of the inquisitors. All this we learn 
from a series of letters despatched, July 27th, by Ferdinand to the 
various officials, from the governor down, in which he gives free 
vent to his wrath and indignation, declaring his will to be un- 
changeable, threatening with punishment and dismissal all who 
resist it and pronouncing as frivolous the argument that the 
Inquisition was an invasion of the privileges of the land. At the 
same time he wrote to the inquisitors informing them of his pro- 
posed measures, instructing them to perform their duties without 


1 Zurita, Afiales, Lib. xx, cap. lvi, Ixv. 
? Arch. Gen. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 11, 12.—Bulario de la Orden de 
Santiago, Lib. 1, fol. 51. 


240 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


fear and cautioning them to observe the fueros and privileges and 
to show clemency and mercy, in so far as they could with a good 
conscience, to those who confessed their errors and applied for 
reconciliation.’ 

Energetic and determined as was the tone of these letters they 
produced no effect upon the obstinate Valencians. The Cdrtes 
and the city joined in sending a deputation to the king to remon- 
strate against the proposed violation of their rights. The Maestre 
Racional stood by and did nothing to remove the dead-lock. 
Even the Royal Council of Valencia prevented the inquisitors 
from opening their tribunal, on the ground that they were for- 
eigners while, by the fueros, none but natives could exercise 
official functions. All this produced another explosion of royal 
anger under date of August 31st. Ferdinand roundly scolded his 
officials and threatened punishment proportioned to the gravity 
of the offence; the reasons alleged by the envoys and the council 
were brushed aside as untenable; he ordered the governor to set 
the inquisitors at work, without caring what the Cortes might do 
or what the people might say, and he exhorted the inquisitors to 
lose no time in performing their duties.” The struggle continued 
but at length opposition was broken down and, on November 7, 
1484, the inquisitors were able formally to assume their functions 
by preaching their sermon de la fe and publishing their edicts, 
Although they were thus in shape to carry on the business of the 
tribunal, the usual solemnities were omitted and they did not 
venture to exact, from the secular and ecclesiastical dignitaries, 
the customary oaths—all of which Ferdinand subsequently 
ordered to be performed.® 

Scarcely had the inquisitors commenced operations when 
Borgia’s representative, the Archdeacon Mateo Mercader, was 
the cause of fresh trouble. Discord arose between him and Juan 
de Epila which threatened to have even more serious results than 
his quarrels with Gualbes, which had compromised the attempt to 
revive the old Inquisition. Ferdinand’s patience was exhausted 
and so serious did he consider the situation that he despatched 
his secretary, Antonio Salavert, to Valencia armed with peremp- 
tory orders to Mercader and the governor. The former was 


1 Arch. Gen. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 19-22. 

2 Ibidem, Reg. 3684, fol. 25, 26. 

’ Zurita, Afiales, Lib. xx, cap. lxv.—Pdramo, p. 187.—Arch. Gen. de la C. de 
A., Reg. 3684, fol. 34. 


Cap. V] VALENCIA 941 


required to make over his episcopal functions to Marti Trigo, 
another vicar-general, to surrender the bull of December 4, 1481, 
delegating to him inquisitorial powers, and no longer to meddle 
in any way with the Holy Office. In case of disobedience, the 
governor was instructed, without a moment’s delay, to order him 
under pain of five thousand florins, to depart within twenty-four 
hours for the royal court and to be beyond the frontier of Valencia 
within six days; if he failed in this all his temporalities were to be 
seized to defray the fine and further contumacy was to be met by 
banishing him from the kingdom as a disobedient rebel. The 
inquisitors were also told no longer to summon him to their delib- 
erations and not to allow him to take part in their action.’ All 
this was in flagrant violation of the fueros of the land and inde- 
pendence of the Church and shows what latitude Ferdinand 
allowed himself when the Inquisition was concerned. It was 
successful however and we hear no more of Mercader, though 
it was not until February 8, 1486, that the curia assented to 
this arbitrary illegality by withdrawing his commission along 
with those of the old inquisitors.? 

Still, Valencia was not disposed to allow to the Inquisition the 
untrammelled exercise of its powers or to render to it the assist- 
ance required of all the faithful. The nobles continued for some 
months to offer resistance and when this was nominally broken 
down it continued in a passive form. To meet it, Ferdinand, in 
a letter of August 17, 1485, ordered Mossen Joan Carrasquier, 
alguazil of the Inquisition, at the simple bidding of the inquisitors, 
to arrest and imprison any one, no matter how high in station. 
For this he was not to ask the concurrence of any secular author- 
ity, for the whole royal power was committed to him and all 
officials, under pain of two thousand gold florins, and other 
arbitrary punishment, were required to lend him active assistance. 
Even this infraction of the royal oath to respect the liberties of 
the subject did not suffice, for another letter of January 23, 1486, 
states that the nobles continued to give refuge in their lands ta 
fugitives from the Inquisition, even to those condemned and burnt 
in effigy, wherefore they were summoned, under their allegiance 
and a penalty of twenty thousand gold florins, to surrender to the 
alguazil all whom he might designate and to aid him in seizing 
them. About the same time Ferdinand placed the royal palace 


———- 


1 Arch. Gen. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 32, 34. 
* Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Libro 1, fol. 31. 
16 


242 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


of Valencia at the service of the Inquisition and ordered to be 
built in it the necessary prisons. _His own officials apparently had 
by this time been taught obedience for in March, 1487, he writes 
to the governor warmly praising their zeal... To stimulate this, 
on July 28, 1487, he issued a safe-conduct, taking under the royal 
protection all the officials of the Inquisition, their families and 
goods; all royal officials, from the highest to the lowest, were 
required, under pain of five thousand florins and the king’s wrath, 
to assist them and to arrest whomsoever they might designate.’ 

Still, there were occasional ebullitions of resistance which were 
met with prompt and effective measures. In 1488 the Lieutenant- 
general of the kingdom ventured to remove by force, from the 
inquisitorial prison, a certain Domingo de Santa Cruz, condemned 
for heresy, and was at once summoned by Torquemada to answer 
for histemerity. Ferdinand at the same time wrote to him severely 
to come without delay and, that the kingdom might not be with- 
out a governor, sent him a commission in blank to fill in with the 
name of a deputy to act during his absence or until the king should 
otherwise provide; moreover, all who had assisted in the removal 
of the prisoner were to be forthwith arrested by the inquisitors.* 
So, when in 1497 the notaries of Valencia claimed that the notaries 
of the Holy Office had no power to certify documents concerning 
the sales of confiscated property and other similar business and 
summoned them before the secular authorities, Ferdinand threat- 
ened them with severe punishment, besides the prosecution by the 
inquisition to which they were liable for impeding it, for it was 
not subject to any of the laws or privileges of the land. He also 
wrote to the Duke of Segorbe, his lieutenant-general, to support 
the Inquisition; the fiscal of the Suprema presented a clamosa 
claiming that those guilty of this action were excommunicate and 
liable to the penalties for fautorship of heresy, and the inquisitor- 
general forwarded this to them with a summons to appear within 
fifteen days and defend themselves.* The Inquisition was so 
sacred that a mere attempt to decide at law a question of business 
was a crime involving heavy penalties. Ferdinand’s sharp 
rebuke, in 1499, when a case of confiscation, involving peculiar 


1 Arch Gen. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 61, 73, 86, 89, 90. 

2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 688, fol. 504. 

8 Portocarrero, Sobre la Competencia de Jurisdicion, fol. 64 (Madrid, 1624). 

* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 1.—Archivo hist. nacional, Inqui- 
sicion de Valencia, Leg. 309, Notarios, fol. 1. 


Cuap. V] ARAGON 243 


hardship, provoked the royal officials and local magistrates to 
meet and draw up a protest in terms unflattering to the tribunal 
has already been referred to (p. 189). It was probably one 
of the results of this that, on June 28, 1500, the inquisitors 
summoned all the officials and the Diputados before them and, 
when all were assembled, read to them the apostolic letters and 
those of the king respecting the tribunal and its fees and required 
all present to take the oath of obedience, which was duly acceded 
to without objections." The unintermitting pressure of the throne 
was thus finally effective and, in spite of its fueros, the little 
kingdom was brought under the yoke. 

The tribunal had been active and efficient. Already, in June, 
1488, a list of those reconciled under the Edicts of Grace amounted 
to 983 and, among these, no less than a hundred women are 
described as the wives or daughters of men who had been burnt. 
Those included in this enumeration were given assurance that 
their property would not be subject to confiscation—unless it 
had already been sequestrated—and that they could effect sales 
and make good titles. Apparently inquisitorial zeal disregarded 
this assurance for these penitents applied for and obtained its 
confirmation, May 30, 1491.” Of course they had been subjected to 
heavy fines under the guise of pecuniary penance and we can 
readily imagine how large was the sum thus contributed to the 
coffers of the Inquisition, to which as yet these fines enured. 


ARAGON. 


The parent state of Aragon proper seemed at first sight to 
present an even more arduous problem than Valencia. The people 
were proud of their ancient liberty and resolute in its mainte- 
nance, through institutions sedulously organized for that purpose. 
The Conversos were numerous, wealthy and powerful, occupying 
many of the higher offices and intermarried with the noblest 
houses and, in the fate of their brethren of Castile, they had ample 
warning of what was in store for them. In the revival of the old 
Inquisition, Valencia was the scene of action and we hear little 


1 Escolano, Hist. del Ciudad y Reyno de Valencia, II, 1442 (Valencia, 1611). 
? Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Legajos 98, 374. 


244 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


of Gualbes and Orts beyond its boundaries. The acceptance, 
however, by the Cértes of Tarazona, in the Spring of 1484, of 
Torquemada’s jurisdiction, of course included Aragon; he lost 
no time in organizing a tribunal in Saragossa, by the appointment, 
May 4th, as inquisitors of Fray Gaspar Juglar and of Maestre 
Pedro Arbués, a canon of the cathedral, with the necessary sub- 
ordinates and, by May 11th, the appointments for a full court were 
completed, as we learn by an order for the payment of the salaries.’ 
The expense was large but it was already provided for; Torque- 
mada must himself have employed his leisure in acting as inquisi- 
tor for, on May 10th, an auto de fe was held in the cathedral in 
which four persons were penanced and subjected to confiscation.’ 
Gaspar Juglar in this appointment obtained his reward for the 
services he had rendered as a nominator of inquisitors, but he 
did not long enjoy it; he disappears almost immediately, pois- 
oned, as it was said, by the Conversos in some rosquillas or sweet 
cakes.2 No time was lost in getting to work. Ferdinand had 
written from Tarazona, May 10th, that the Edict of Grace which 
had been resolved upon was not to be published, but that proceed- 


1 Arch. gén. de la de C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol 16. 


To Maestre Gaspar Juglar, inguisitor . . . . . . 83000 race 

A PATLCQUISILOT ON Matin) Tas a ey) cere ees 

** Maestre Pedro de Epila, inquisitor.,  . . «© «. s 10005)% 
‘“ Micer Martin de la Raga, assessor . . . . . . 1000 “ 
**-Brancisco de Santa Fe notary, =. 0%). weiie lies eee 
“ Juan de Anchias, notary sae (vee a 2 OOO ESD 
““ Ruy Sanchez de Sie promotor acl. pot tof S; 2 2OD0 sae 
Don ‘Ramon de Mur, advocate fiscal’. 9.9 4.) 21000 meee 
fo Diego Aiopez,-alouagil Shore ee cas <a ee OUOU mame 
‘¢ Juan de Exea, receiver . . 1500 oa 


The blank for the second inquisitor is ouotlesd to Be filled with the name of 
Maestre Martin Garcia, who appears in a later portion of the document classed 
with Arbués (Pedro de Epila). The large salary of the alguazil arose from his 
bearing the charges of the prisons. The salaries of Arbués, Raga, Mur and 
Anchias were to begin with May 1st, showing that they alone were already at work. 
The rest were to commence on the day on which they would swear that they left 
their homes. 

2 Memoria de diversos Autos (see Appendix). 

* Ibidem. In this MS. he is called Maestre Julian, presumably the error of a 
copyist. Lanuza (Hist. de Aragon, II, 168, 177) says that he died in January, 
1485, in the monastery of Lérida; that some asserted that he was poisoned by the 
heretics and that the manner of his death was investigated by the chapter of his 
convent, but that no decision seems to have been reached. In 1646 a memorial 
from the authorities of Aragon to Philip IV classes Juglar with Arbués as a 
martyr to the faith.—Bibl. nacional, Seccion de MSS., Mm, 123. 


Cuap. V] OPPOSITION IN SARAGOSSA 245 


ings should go on as if it had been proclaimed and had expired, 
thus depriving the Conversos of the opportunity of coming for- 
ward for confessing, and explaining the absence at Saragossa of 
the long lists of penitents that we find elsewhere.’ Thus, although 
some time must have been required for the members of the 
tribunal to assemble, by June 3d it was ready for another auto, 
held in the courtyard of the archiepiscopal palace. This time it 
was not bloodless, for two men were executed and a woman was 
burnt in effigy.’ 

No more autos were held in Saragossa for eighteen months. 
Thus far the people had been passive; they had accepted the 
action of the Cortes of Tarazona, apparently under the impression 
that the new Inquisition would be as inert as the old had so long 
been, but, as they awoke to the reality, an opposition arose which 
called a halt and Arbués never celebrated another auto. Not only 
the Conversos but many of the Old Christians denounced the 
Inquisition as contrary to the liberties of the land. The chief 
objections urged against it were the secrecy of procedure and the 
confiscation of estates and, as these were the veriest commonplaces 
of inquisitorial business, it shows how completely the old institu- 
tion had been dormant. So many Conversos were lawyers and 
judges and high officials that they had abundant opportunity 
to impede the action of the tribunal by obtaining injunctions and 
decisions of the courts as to confiscations, which they regarded as 
the most assailable point, believing that if these could be stopped 
the whole business would perish of inanition.’ 

To overcome this resistance, resort was had to the rule com- 
pelling all who held office to take the oath of obedience to the 
Inquisition. On September 19th, the royal and local officials were 
assembled and solemnly sworn to maintain inviolably the holy 
Roman Catholic faith, to employ all their energies against every 
one of whatever rank, who was a heretic or suspect of heresy or a 
fautor of heresy, to denounce any one whom they might know to 
be guilty and to appoint to office no one suspect in the faith or 
incapacitated by law. A few days later the same oath was taken 
by the Governor of Aragon, Juan Francisco de Heredia and his 
assessor, Francisco de Santa Fe, son of that Geronimo de Santa 
Fe the convert, who had stimulated the popular abhorrence of 


1 Arch. gén. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 12. 
2 MS. Memoria (see Appendix). 
8 Zurita, Afiales, Lib. xx, cap. Ixv.—Pdramo, pp. 180-1. 


246 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON {Book I 


Judaism. Other nobles were subsequently required to take the 
oath, and it was gradually administered to all the different Estates. 
Then, in November, followed Torquemada’s assembly of inquisi- 
tors at Seville, whose instructions were duly transmitted to Aragon 
for observance, although Aragon had not been represented in the 
conference. Thus far the tribunal seems to have had no definite 
quarters, but it was now settled in some houses between the 
cathedral. and the archiepiscopal palace, convenient to the 
ecclesiastical gaol.’ 

Agitation grew stronger and those who deemed themselves in 
danger began to seek safety in flight, whereupon Ferdinand, on 
November 4th, issued orders to the authorities of the three king- 
doms to adopt whatever means might be necessary to prevent the 
departure of all who were not firm in the faith. The effort proved 
ineffective, as it was decided to be in violation of the fueros, but 
the Inquisition was superior to the fueros and Ferdinand in- 
structed the inquisitors to issue an edict forbidding any one to 
leave the kingdom without their license, under pain of being held 
as a relapsed heretic in case of return, and this scandalous stretch 
of arbitrary power he sarcastically said that he would enforce so 
that the object might be attained without infringing on the 
liberties of the kingdom.’ 

The rich Conversos offered large amounts to the sovereigns if 
they would forego the confiscations, but the proposition was 
rejected. A heavy sum was subscribed to propitiate the curia, 
but the arrangement by which the land was subjected to Torque- 
mada was too recent to be changed. The lieutenant of the 
Justicia of Aragon, Tristan de la Porta, was urged to prohibit the 
Inquisition altogether, but in vain. Then the Four Estates of 
the realm were called together to deliberate on a subject which 
involved the liberties of the whole land. To forestall their action 
Ferdinand, on December 10th, addressed a circular letter to the 
deputies and to the leading nobles, entreating them affectionately 
to favor and aid the inquisitors of Saragossa and Teruel, but this 
had no influence and a solemn embassy was sent to remonstrate 
with him. To their representations he answered, disposing of 
their arguments by assuming practically that he was only the 
agent of the Church in enforcing the well-known principles of the 
canons. The essence of his answer is embodied in responding to 


1 Zurita, Afiales, Lib. xx, cap. lxv. 
2 Arch. gén. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 28, 86. 


Cuap. V] RESISTANCE IN TERUEL 247 


their demand that the Inquisition be carried on as in times past, 
for in any other way it violated the liberties of the kingdom. 
‘‘ There is no intention” he said ‘‘of infringing on the fueros but 
rather of enforcing their observance. It is not to be imagined that 
vassals so Catholic as those of Aragon would have demanded, or 
that kings so Catholic would have granted, fueros and liberties 
adverse to the faith and favorable to heresy. If the old inquisitors 
had acted conscientiously in accordance with the canons there 
would have been no cause for bringing in the new ones, but they 
were without conscience and corrupted with bribes. If there are 
so few heretics as is now asserted, there should not be such dread 
of the Inquisition. It is not to be impeded in sequestrating and 
confiscating and other necessary acts, for be assured that no cause 
or interest, however great, shall be allowed to interfere with its 
proceeding in future as it is now doing.’” 

Meanwhile there had been, at Teruel, a more open resistance to 
the Inquisition, in which the inflexible purpose of the monarch 
to enforce obedience at any cost was abundantly demonstrated. 
Simultaneously with the organization of the Saragossa tribunal, 
Fray Juan Colivera and Mossen Martin Navarro were sent to 
Teruel with their subordinates to establish one there. Teruel was 
a fortified city of some importance, near the Castilian border, the 
capital of its district, although it was not elevated into a separate 
bishopric until 1577. When the reverend fathers appeared before 
the gates, the magistrates refused them entrance and they pru- 
dently retired to Cella, a village about four leagues distant, 
whence they fulminated an edict excommunicating the magis- 
trates and casting an interdict on the town. From the venal papal 
court Teruel had no difficulty in procuring letters in virtue of which 
the dean, Francisco Savistan, and Martin de San Juan, rector 
of Villaquemada, absolved the excommunicates and removed the 
interdict, nor is it likely that any success attended Ferdinand’s 
order to his son, the Archbishop of Saragossa, to send to his 
official at Teruel secret instructions to seize the two priests and 
hold them in chains. The town sent a supplication to him by 
Juan de la Mata and Micer Jaime Mora, but he only ordered them 
to send home a peremptory command to submit, under pain of such 
punishment as should serve as a perpetual example. This he also 
communicated to the Governor of Aragon, Juan Fernandez de 
Heredia, with instructions to take it to Teruel and read it to the 


1 Arch. gén. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 29, 35. 


248 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


magistrates, when, if they did not yield, a formal summons to 
appear before him was to be read to each one individually—all 
of which was doubtless performed without effect. Ferdinand had 
also ordered the envoys not to leave the court, but they fled 
secretly and his Joy was extreme when, six months later, Juan de 
la Mata was captured by Juan Garcés de Marzilla. 

The next step of the Inquisition was a decree, October 2, 1484, 
confiscating to the crown all the offices in Teruel and pronouncing 
the incumbents incapable of holding any office of honor or profit 
—a decree which Ferdinand proceeded to execute by stopping 
their salaries. It was in vain that the Diputados of Aragon inter- 
ceded with him; he replied curtly that the people of Teruel had 
nothing to complain of and were guilty of madness and outrage. 
Then the inquisitors took final action, which was strictly within 
their competence, by issuing a letter invoking the aid of the secular 
arm and summoning the king to enable them to seize the magis- 
trates and confiscate their property. To this he responded, Feb- 
ruary 5, 1485, with an Executoria invocationis brachii secularis, 
addressed to all the officials of Aragon, requiring them and the 
nobles to assemble all the horse and foot that they could raise 
and put them at the service of the inquisitors, under a captain 
whom he would send to take command. Under pain of the royal 
wrath, deprivation of office, a fine of twenty thousand gold florins 
and discretional penalties, they were ordered to seize all the 
inhabitants of Teruel and their property and deliver them to the 
inquisitors to be punished for their enormous crimes in such wise 
as should serve for a lasting example. The people of Cella, also, 
were ordered to deliver their castle to the inquisitors to serve as 
a prison and to make all repairs necessary for that purpose. 
Apparently the response of Aragon to this summons was unsatis- 
factory for Ferdinand, in defiance of the fuero which forbade the 
introduction of foreign troops into the kingdom, took the extreme 
step of calling upon the nobles of Cuenca and other Castilian dis- 
tricts contiguous to the border, to raise their men and join in the 
holy war, while the receiver of confiscations was ordered to sell 
enough property to meet the expenses. Whether this formidable 
array was raised or not, the documents do not inform us, nor of 
the circumstances under which Teruel submitted, but it had 
braved the royal will as long as it dared and it could not hold out 
against the forces of two kingdoms. By April 15th Ferdinand was 
in position to appoint Juan Garcés de Marzilla, the captor of Juan 


CHap. V] RESISTANCE IN TERUEL 249 


de la Mata, as asszstente or governor of Teruel, with absolute dicta- 
torial powers, and the spirit in which he exercised them may be 
gathered from his declaration that he did not intend to allow 
fueros or privileges to stand in the way. The lot of the inhabi- 
tants was hard. Ferdinand ordered Marzilla to banish all whom 
the inquisitors might designate, thus placing the whole population 
at their mercy, and their rule must have been exasperating, for, 
in January, 1486, Ferdinand reproaches Marzilla because his 
nephew, who had aided in the capture of la Mata, had recently 
attempted to slay the alguazil of the Inquisition. Presumably 
the inquisitorial coffers were filled with the fines and confisca- 
tions which could be inflicted at discretion on the citizens for 
impeding the Inquisition. During the long struggle Teruel had 
been at the disadvantage that the surrounding country supported 
the inquisitors, won over through an astute device by which the 
inquisitors, while at Cella, had guaranteed, on the payment of 
certain sums, the remission of all debts and the release of all 
censos or bonds and groundrents, which might be due to heretics 
who should be convicted and subjected to confiscation in Teruel. 
All debtors were thus eager for the success of the inquisitors and 
for the punishment of heresy among the money-lending Conversos 
of the town." 


Meanwhile, in Saragossa, the Conversos were growing desperate. 
All peaceful means of averting the fate that hung over them had 
failed and events at Teruel demonstrated the futility of resistance. 
The bolder spirits began to whisper that the only resource left 
was to kill an inquisitor or two, when the warning would deter 
others from incurring the hazard. They knew that secret infor- 
mations were on foot gathering from all sources testimony against 
them all. Inquisitor Arbués was almost openly said to be ready 
to pay for satisfactory evidence, and the life and fortune of every 
man was at the mercy of the evil-minded.? Sancho de Paternoy, 
the Maestre Racional of Aragon, when on trial, admitted to preju- 
dice against Juan de Anchias, secretary of the tribunal, because 


1 Arch. gén. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 12, 23, 27, 31, 35, 38, 39, 42, 47-9, 
51-3, 55-8, 60, 63, 72, 98. 

In 1502, with characteristic faithlessness, the inquisitors at Teruel proposed 
to collect all the debts due to the confiscated estates, but Ferdinand intervened 
and sternly forbade it.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 2, fol. 16. 

2 Bibl. nacionale de France, fonds espagnol, 80, fol. 4. 


950 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


he had enquired of a Jewish tailor whether Paternoy had a seat 
in the synagogue.’ Suspense was becoming insupportable; the 
project of assassination gradually took shape and, when the friends 
of the Conversos at the royal court were consulted, including 
Ferdinand’s treasurer Gabriel Sanchez, they approved of it and 
wrote that if an inquisitor was murdered it would put an end to 
the Inquisition.’ 

At first the intention was to make way not only with Pedro 
Arbués but with the assessor, Martin de la Raga, and with Micer 
Pedro Francés, and a plot was laid to drown the assessor while he 
was walking by the Ebro, but he chanced to be accompanied by 
two gentlemen and it was abandoned.’ The whole attention of 
the conspirators was then concentrated on Arbués. Maestre 
Epila, as he was commonly called, was not a man of any special 
note, though his selection by Torquemada indicates that he was 
reputed to possess the qualities necessary to curb the recalcitrant 
Aragonese, and we are told that he was an eloquent preacher. 
He possessed the gift of prophecy, if we may believe the story that 
he foretold to his colleague Martin Garcfa that he would reach the 
episcopate, for Garcia, in 1512, became Bishop of Barcelona, but 
such foresight is not necessary to explain his reluctance to accept 
the inquisitorship, for, although this was always a promising 
avenue to promotion, the post was evidently to be an arduous 
one.* His hesitation was overcome and we have seen how ener- 
getically he commenced his new career, yet the interruptions 
which supervened had prevented him from accomplishing much 
and he fell a victim rather to fear than to revenge. 

The conspirators were evidently irresolute, for the plot was long 
in hatching, but the secret was wonderfully well kept, considering 
that the correspondence respecting it was extensive. Rumors 
however were not lacking and, as early as January 29, 1485, Ferdi- 
nand wrote to the Governor of Aragon that a conspiracy was on 
foot and that a large sum was being raised to embarrass the 
Inquisition in every way, yet at the same time he thanked the 
jurats for their zeal in aiding the inquisitors.° If suspicion was 


1 Libro Verde de Aragon (MS., fol. 67). 

? Libro Verde (Revista de Espafia, CVI, 281-2). 

3 Zurita, Afiales, Libro xx, cap. Ixv. 

* Trasmiera, Epitome de la santa Vida y relacion de la gloriosa muerte del 
Venerable Pedro de Arbués, pp. 15, 32, 50 (Madrid, 1664).—Villanueva, Viage 
literario, XVIII, 50. 

® Arch. gén. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 37, 38. 


Cap. V] ASSASSINATION OF ARBUES 251 


then aroused, it slumbered again and for six months meetings 
were held without being discovered. It was determined to raise 
a fund for hiring assassins and three treasurers were appointed. 
Juan de Esperandeu, a currier, known as a desperate man, whose 
father had been arrested, undertook to find the bravos and hired 
Juan de la Badia for the purpose. In April or May, 1485, an 
attempt was made on the house where Arbués lodged, but the 
men were frightened off and the matter was postponed for several 
months. At length, on the night of September 15th, Esperandeu 
went to the house of la Badfa and wakened him; together they 
returned to Ksperandeu’s, where they found the latter’s servant 
Vidau Durango, a Frenchman, with Mateo Ram, one of the 
leaders of the plot, his squire Tristanico Leonis and three others 
who were masked and who remained unknown. They all went 
to the cathedral and entered by the chapter door, which was 
open on account of the service of matins. Arbués was kneeling 
in prayer between the high altar and the choir, where the canons 
were chanting; he knew that his life was threatened, for he wore 
a coat of mail and a steel cap, while a lance which he carried was 
leaning against a pillar. La Badfa whispered to Durango ‘‘ There 
he is, give it to him!” Durango stole up behind and, with a 
back-stroke, clove his neck between his armor. He rose and 
staggered towards the choir, followed by la Badia, who pierced 
him through the arm, while Mateo Ram was also said to have 
thrust him through the body. He fell; the assassins hurried away 
and the canons, alarmed at the noise, rushed from the choir and 
carried him to his house near by, where surgeons were summoned 
who pronounced the wounds to be mortal. He lay for twenty- 
four hours, repeating, we are told, pious ejaculations, and died on 
September 17th, between 1 and 2 a.m. Miracles at once attested 
his sanctity. On the night of the murder the holy bell of Villela 
tolled without human hands, breaking the bull’s pizzle with which 
the clapper was secured. His blood, which stained the flagstones 
of the cathedral, after drying for two weeks, suddenly liquefied, 
so that crowds came to dip in it cloths and scapulars and had to 
be forcibly driven off when he was buried on the spot where he 
_ fell: when the conspirators were interrogated by the inquisitors, 
their mouths became black and their tongues were parched so 
that they were unable to speak until water was given to them. 
It was popularly believed that when, in their flight, they reached 
the boundaries of the kingdom, they became divinely benumbed 


252 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


until seized by their captors. More credible is the miracle, 
reported by Juan de Anchias, that their trials led to the discovery 
of innumerable heretics who were duly penanced or burnt.' 
Pecuniarily the affair had not been costly; the whole outlay had 
been only six hundred florins, of which one hundred was paid to 
the assassin.’ 

Like the murder of Pierre de Castelnau in Languedoc, this 
crime turned the scale. Its immediate effect was to cause a revul- 
sion of popular feeling, which hitherto had been markedly hostile 
to the Inquisition. The news of the assassination spread through 
the city with marvellous rapidity and before dawn the streets 
were filled with excited crowds shouting ‘‘Burn the Conversos 
who have slain the inquisitor!’’ There was danger, in the exalta- 
tion of feeling, not only that the Conversos would be massacred 
but that the Juderfa and Morerfa would be sacked. By daylight 
the archbishop, Alfonso de Aragon, mounted his horse and 
traversed the streets, calming the mob with promises of speedy 
justice. A meeting was at once called of all the principal persons 
in the city, which resolved itself into a national assembly and 
empowered all ecclesiastical and secular officials to proceed against 
every one concerned with the utmost vigor and without observing 
the customs and fueros of the kingdom.’ For some days the Con- 


1 Memoria de diversos Autos (Appendix).—Libro Verde (Revista de Espafia, 
CVI, 281-6, 288).—Raynald Annal. ann. 1485, n. 23, 24.—Zurita, Afiales, Lib. 
xx, cap. lxv._Juan Gines Septilveda, Descriptio Collegii Hespanorum Bononi- 
ensis.—Blancas, Aragon. Rerum Comment. p. 268.—Bibliothéque nat. de 
France, fonds espagnol, 80, fol. 33. 

In spite of these miracles and of innumerable others which manifested the 
sanctity of Arbués, the Holy See was distinctly averse to his canonization. A 
papal brief even ordered the removal from the cathedral of the sanbenitos of 
the assassins and strenuous efforts were required to procure its revocation. 

Repeated investigations were made by successive popes without result—at 
the request of Charles V in 1537; of Philip III in 1604, 1615 and 1618; of Philip 
IV in 1622 and 1652, until at length in 1664 he was beatified (Trasmiera, pp. 98, 
99, 133, 137, 139). The matter then rested for two centuries until, in 1864, it 
was taken up again and finally, June 29, 1867, he was canonized by Pius IX 
(Dom. Bartolini, Comment. Actor. Omnium Canonizationis, Rome, 1868). 

It is significant that the Inquisition did not await the tardy action of Rome. 
Instructions of the Suprema in 1603, 1623 and 1633 show that his feast was 
regularly celebrated with prescribed offices (MSS. of Royal Library of Copen- 
hagen, 218>, p. 257) and, during the 17th and 18th centuries, he is constantly 
spoken of, in the documents of the Inquisition relating to the feast, as San Pedro 
Arbués. 

2 Memoria de diversos Autos, Auto 25 (Appendix). 3 Zurita, loc. cit. 


eS ee ee 


SeE<—<—— = 


Cuap. V] REVULSION OF FEELING 253 


-versos continued to flatter themselves that with money they 


would disarm Ferdinand’s wrath; they had, they said, the whole 
court with them and the sympathies of all the magnates of the 
land,’ but they miscalculated his shrewd resolve to profit to the 
utmost by their blunder and the consequent weakness of their 
friends. The royal anger, indeed, was much dreaded and the 
Diputados, a few days later, wrote to the king reporting what had 
been done; the criminals had already scattered in flight; the city 
had offered a reward of five hundred ducats; the judges had 
written to foreign lands to invoke aid in intercepting the fugitives 
and both city and kingdom would willingly undergo all labor and 
expense necessary to avenge the crime. A proclamation was also 
issued excommunicating all having knowledge of the conspiracy 
who should not within a given time come forward and reveal what 
they knew.’ 

It was probably in consequence of the murder that Ferdinand 
and Isabella succeeded in obtaining, from Innocent VIII, papal 
letters of April 3, 1487, ordering all princes and rulers and magis- 
trates to seize and deliver to the Inquisition of Spain all fugitives 
who should be designated to them, thus extending its arms every- 
where throughout Christendom and practically outlawing all 
refugees; no proof was to be required, simple requisition sufficed, 
the surrender was to be made within thirty days and safe-conduct 
assured to the frontier, under pain of excommunication and the 
penalties for fautorship of heresy. Fortunately for humanity this 
atrocious attempt to establish a new international law by papal 
absolutism was practically ignored.* 

' Memoria, loc cit. 

2 Gams, Zur Geschichte der spanischen Staatsinquisition, p. 34.—Bibl. nation- 
ale de France, fonds espagnol, 81. 

8 This brief is printed in the Boletin, XVI, 368 by Padre Fidel Fita, who is in 
error in assuming its obedience in France from the case of Juan de Pedro Sdénchez, 
reported in an essay of mine on the Martyrdom of Arbués. This was merely an 
instance of friendly co-operation between the Inquisitions of Toulouse and Sara- 
gossa and occurred too early to be the result of the papal letters which were not 
received in Cérdova until May 31, 1487. 

We have seen (p. 191), by a case occurring in 1501, that Manoel of Portugal 
considered that there was no obligation to return fugitives from the Inquisition; 
it was a matter of comity to be decided on the merits of each case. There was a 
similar one in 1500, and when, in 1510 and 1514, fugitives were asked for, under 
plea that they were wanted as witnesses, Manoel refused to surrender them with- 
out absolute pledges that they should suffer no harm (Archivo de Simancas, 
Inquisicion, Libro 1; Libro 3, fol. 85, 107, 110). 

When Portugal obtained an Inquisition, the two inquisitors-general, in 1544, 


254 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


There was one case however in which its punitive clauses seem 
to have been invoked. Several of the accomplices in the assas- 
sination found refuge in Tudela, a frontier city of Navarre and, 
on January 27, 1486, Ferdinand wrote to the magistrates there 
affectionately requesting that, if the inquisitors should send for the 
accused, all aid should be rendered, seeing that he had given orders 
to obey such requisitions throughout his own kingdoms. This 
application was unsuccessful and in May he repeated it imperi- 
ously, threatening war upon them as defenders of heretics... The 
condition of the perishing kingdom of Navarre, under the youthful 
Catherine and Jean d’Albret, was not such as to protect it from 
the insults of a sovereign like Ferdinand and the inquisitors pre- 
sumed so far as to instruct Don Juan de Ribera, then in command 
of the frontier, to carry the royal threats into execution. That 
prudent officer refused to make war upon a friendly state without 
the protection of an express order bearing the signatures of 
Ferdinand and Isabella, whereupon, on June 30th, the inquisitors 
complained of him to the king. He was in Galicia, suppressing a 
rising of the Count of Lemos and reducing the lawless nobles to 
order and from Viso, July 22d, he replied that he would at once 
have sent the order but that he had brought with him all the 
frontier troops; as soon as his task was accomplished he would 
send back forces with orders to Don Juan to make war on Tudela 
in such fashion as to compel it to do what was requisite for the 
service of God.? A letter of the same date to Torquemada states 
that the inquisitors have asked for letters of marque and reprisal 
against Tudela on account of Luis de Santangel, but this must be 
preceded by a carta requisitoria, which he instructs Torquemada 
to prepare and send to him when he will execute it. It was not 
until the end of November that the sovereigns returned to Sala- 
manca and it is presumable that the campaign against Tudela 
was postponed until the Spring. Of course the fugitives had long 
before sought some safer asylum, but the papal brief of April 3, 


came to an agreement, with the assent of the respective monarchs, which super- 
seded extradition. The fugitive was to be tried in the country where he was 
captured and the Inquisition from which he had fled was to furnish the evidence. 
—Bibl. nacional, Seccion de MSS. X, 257, fol. 218. 

1 Arch. gén. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 75.—Amador de los Rios, III, 269. 

2 Arch. gén. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 103. 

§ Tbidem, fol. 102 (see Appendix). It was Martin de Santangel, not Luis, who 
took refuge in Tudela. He was not caught, but was burnt in effigy, July 28, 
1486. 


Cuap. V] THE INQUISITION AT WORK 255 


- 1487, could be enforced against the magistrates and they endured 
the humiliation of submitting to the tribunal of Saragossa. At 
an auto de fe held March 2, 1488, the alcalde and eight of the 
citizens appeared and performed penance.* 

Ferdinand recognized the opportunity afforded by the assassina- 
tion of Arbués and was resolved to make the most of it. Promi- 
nent among the means for this was the stimulation of the popular 
veneration of the martyr. On September 29, 1486, his solemn 
exequies were celebrated with as much solemnity as those of the 
holiest saint; a splendid tomb was built to which his remains were 
translated, December 8, 1487; a statue was erected with an 
inscription by the sovereigns and over it a bas-relief representing 
the scene of the murder. During a pestilence, in 1490, the city 
ordered a silver lamp, fifty ounces in weight, to be placed before 
the tomb and another silver lamp to burn day and night? His 
cult as a saint was not allowed to await the tardy recognition of 
the Holy See. 

The conspirators miscalculated when they imagined that his 
murder would deter others from taking his place. There was no 
danger for inquisitors now in Aragon and the tribunal of Saragossa 
was promptly remanned and enlarged for the abundant harvest 
that was expected.* It was not long in getting to work and on 
December 28, 1485, an auto was celebrated in which a man and a 
woman were burnt. The tribunal was removed to the royal 
palace-fortress outside of the walls, known as the Aljaferia, as an 
evidence that it was under the royal safeguard and Ferdinand 
proclaimed that he and his successors took it under their special 
protection.’ Strict orders were sent to the Estates of the kingdom 


1 Memoria de diversos Autos, Auto 29 (Appendix). 

In after years, Ferdinand was less inclined to invade friendly territory. Feb- 
ruary 25, 1501, writing to the Archdeacon of Almazan, Inquisitor of Catalayud, 
about an inhabitant of Fitero, a town just beyond the border, he says that if the 
culprit can be arrested within his jurisdiction it can be done, but there must be 
no deceit and no scandal.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 1. 

2 Zurita, Afiales, Lib. xx, cap. Ixv.—Llorente, Hist. crft. Cap. v1, Art. ii, n. 1. 
—Trasmiera, p. 101. 

8 Arch. gén. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 67, 68, 83, 86. 

4 Memoria de diversos Autos, Auto 3 (see Appendix). 

5 Zurita, loc. cit,—The order to receive the tribunal in the Aljaferfa bears date 
January 12, 1486 (Arch. gén. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 83). Subsequently it 
was transferred to the archiepiscopal palace in order to let the Aljaferia be occupied 
by amember of the royal family, but the inquisitors complained and were allowed 
to return in 1498. They encroached upon the royal apartments, much to Ferdi- 


256 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


and to the local officials to suppress summarily all resistance to 
the confiscations, which were becoming so extensive that the 
receiver at Saragossa had his hands full and was empowered to 
appoint deputies throughout the land to attend to the work in 
their respective districts.’ 

In the prevailing temper pia was hot after the murderers 
of Arbués and the avengers were soon upon their track. There 
were some hair-breadth escapes, and much curious detail, for 
which space fails us here, will be found in the Memoria de diversos 
Autos in the Appendix, some of it showing that there were power- 
ful secret influences in favor of individuals. One party, consist- 
ing of the chief contriver of the plot, Juan de Pedro Sanchez and 
his wife, Gaspar de Santa Cruz and his wife, Martin de Santangel, 
Garcia de Moras, Mossen Pedro Mafias and the two Pedro de 
Almazan, effected their escape by way of Tudela, for which, as 
we have seen, that city was held responsible, and the Lord of 
Cadreyta, an ancestor of the Dukes of Alburquerque, was penanced 
for giving them shelter and receiving sixty florins in payment.’ 

Although by decree both secular and ecclesiastical courts were 
empowered to punish the guilty, the prosecutions seem to have 
been left altogether to the Inquisition and it had the satisfaction 
of burning the effigies of the fugitives. Many, however, paid the 
penalty in their persons. Vidau Durango was soon caught at 
Lérida, when he made no difficulty in revealing the details of the 
plot and the names of the accomplices. The work of retribution 
followed and was continued for years. In the auto of June 30, 
1486, Juan de Pedro Sanchez was burnt in effigy; Vidau Durango 
was treated mercifully, doubtless in consideration of his com- 
municativeness; his hands were cut off and nailed to the door of 
the Diputacion, or House of Diputados, and it was not until he 
was dead that he was dragged to the market-place when he was 
beheaded and quartered and the fragments were suspended in the 
streets. The punishment of Juan de Esperandeu was more harsh; 
he was dragged while living to the portal of the cathedral when 
his hands were cut off; he was then dragged to the market-place, 


nand’s disgust, as expressed in a letter of September 30, 1511. In January, 1515, 
he ordered them to leave the palace and rent accommodations in the city, but 
finally they obtained permanent possession.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, 
Libro 1; Libro 8, fol. 155, 321, 322. 

1 Arch. gén. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 76. 

? Memoria de diversos Autos, Auto 27, n. 3 (see Appendix). 


Cuap. V] PUNISHMENT OF THE ASSASSINS 257 


beheaded and quartered, as in the case of Durango. On July 
28th, Gaspar de Santa Cruz and Martin de Santangel were burnt 
in effigy and Pedro de Exea, who had contributed to the fund, was 
burnt alive. On October 21st, Maria dela Badia was burnt as an 
accessory. On December 15th an auto was hastily arranged; 
Francisco de Santa Fe, assessor of the Governor of Aragon and son 
of the great Converso Jeronimo de Santa Fe, was fatally com- 
promised in the conspiracy; hopeless of escape he threw himself 
from the battlement of the tower in which he was confined and 
was dashed to pieces and the same day his remains were burnt 
and his bones, enclosed in a box, were cast into the Tagus as 
though it was feared that they would be venerated as those of a 
martyr. Juan de la Badia eluded his tormentors in even more 
desperate fashion. An auto was arranged for January 21, 1487, 
in which he was to suffer; in his cell the day before he broke in 
pieces a glass lamp and swallowed the fragments, which speedily 
brought the death he craved; the next day his corpse was dragged 
and quartered and the hands were cut off and on the same occasion 
there were burnt in effigy as accomplices Pedro de Almazan the 
elder, Anton Pérez and Pedro de Vera. On March 15th Mateo 
Ram, who superintended the murder, had his hands cut off and 
was then burnt, with Joan Francés, who was suspected of com- 
plicity and the effigies of three accomplices, Juan Ram, Alonso 
Sanchez and Garcia de Moras. August 8th, Luis de Santangel, who 
was one of the chief conspirators, was beheaded in the market- 
place, his head was set upon a pole and his body was burnt.’ 

Thus the ghastly tragedy went on for years, as the ramifications 
of the conspiracy were explored and all who were remotely con- 
nected with it were traced. It was not until 1488 that Juan de la 
Caballerfa was placed on trial, the wife of Gaspar de la Caballerfa 
having testified that her husband told her that Juan had offered 
him five hundred florins to kill the inquisitor. Juan admitted 
having learned from Juan de Pedro Sanchez that there was a 
fund for the purpose and that he had mentioned it to Gaspar but 
concluded that Gaspar had not sufficient resolution for the deed; 
he died in gaol in 1490 and his body was burnt in the auto of 
July 8, 1491, while Gaspar was penanced in that of September 8, 
1492.’ In this latter auto Sancho de Paternoy, Maestre Racional 


? Memoria de diversos Autos, Autos 10, 11, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22 (Appendix) 
? Bibl. nacionale de France, fonds espagnol, 81.—Memoria de diversos Autos, 
Auto 43, n. 6; Auto 45, n. 1. 
17 


258 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


of Aragon, was penanced with perpetual imprisonment. His trial 
had been a prolonged one; he had been repeatedly tortured and 
had confessed privity to the murder and had then retracted 
wholly, saying that he knew nothing about it and that he had 
spent the night of the assassination in the palace of the arch- 
bishop. His guilt was not clear; he had powerful friends, especially 
Gabriel Sdnchez, Ferdinand’s treasurer, and he was punished on 
mere suspicion.’ Any expression of satisfaction at the murder 
was an offence to be dearly expiated. Among the crimes for 
which Pedro Sanchez was burnt, May 2, 1489, this is enumerated 
and it was one of the chief accusations brought against Brianda 
de Bardaxf, but, though she admitted it under torture she 
retracted it afterwards; it could not be proved against her and she 
was let off with a fine of a third of her property and temporary 
imprisonment.” The assassination gave the Inquisition ample 
opportunity to make a profound impression and it made the 
most of its good fortune.® 


1 Libro Verde (Revista de Espafia, CVI, 287, 589.—Ibid. MS. fol. 65-74). 

* Memoria de diversos Autos, Auto 36, n. 1.—Bibl. nacionale de France, fonds 
espagnol, 80. 

3 It is impossible to construct a full catalogue of the victims. Llorente un- 
doubtedly exaggerates when he asserts (Hist. erft. Chap. v1, Art. v, n. 1) that 
the executions numbered more than 200 and so does Amador de los Rios (III, 
266) in saying that the greater part of those who appeared in the Saragossa 
autos from 1486 to 1492 were accomplices in the murder. The sentences 
abstracted in the Memoria show that but few of them were concerned in it. 

Anchias, the notary of the tribunal, in his account of the affair, only enumerates 
as put to death three treasurers of the fund, five assassins and four accomplices 
besides Sancho de Paternoy and Alonso de Alagon who escaped with imprison- 
ment through friendly influences (Libro Verde, Revista, CVI, 287). The indica- 
tions in the Memoria are incomplete as, after May, 1489, the crimes of the culprits 
are not stated but, so far as it goes and comparing it with the Libro Verde and 
other sources, I find nine executed in person, besides two suicides, thirteen burnt 
in effigy and four penanced for complicity. Besides these are two penanced for 
suborning false witness in favor of Luis de Santangel and seventeen for aiding 
or sheltering the guilty, and two for rejoicing at the crime. Altogether, fifty or 
sixty will probably cover the total of those who suffered in various ways. 

The sanbenitos of the convicts, with inscriptions, were hung as customary in 
the cathedral and remain there to the present day (Amador de los Rios, III, 266). 
The swords of the murderers are still to be seen attached to the pillars near the 
entrance to the chancel (V. de la Fuente, in Oviedo’s Quinquagenas, I, 73). One 
of the latter was removed in 1518, by order of Leo X, and when the commissioner 
who had performed the act died shortly afterward it was popularly regarded as 
a visitation of God (Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Toledo, Hacienda, 
Legajo 10). 


ae 


Cuap. V] RAVAGES OF THE INQUISITION 259 


The Inquisition thus had overcome all resistance and Aragon 
lay at its mercy. How that mercy was exercised is seen in the 
multitude of victims from among the principal Converso families 
which were almost extinguished by the stake or by confiscation. 
The names of Caballeria, SAnchez, Santangel, Ram and others 
occur with wearying repetition in the lists of the autos de fe. 
Thus of the Santangel, who were descended from the convert 
Rabbi Azarias Ginillo, Martin de Santangel escaped to France 
and was burnt in effigy; Luis de Santangel, who had been 
knighted by Juan II for services in the war with Catalonia, was 
beheaded and burnt as we have seen. His cousin, Luis de Sant- 
angel, Ferdinand’s financial secretary, who advanced to Isabella 
the 16,000 or 17,000 ducats to enable Columbus to discover the 
New World, was penanced July 17, 1491. He still continued in 
the royal service but he must have been condemned again for, 
after his death, about 1500, Ferdinand kindly made over his con- 
fiscated property to his children, including a thousand ducats of 
composition for the confiscation of Micer Tarancio. There was 
yet another Luis de Santangel, who married a daughter of Juan 
Vidal, also a victim of the Inquisition, and who finally fled with 
her to France, after which he was burnt in effigy. Juan de Sant- 
angel was burnt in 1486. Juan Tomas de Santangel was penanced, 
August 12, 1487. A brother of Juan was the Zalmedina de Sant- 
angel who fled to France and was burnt in efhigy March 17, 1497. 
Gabriel de Santangel was condemned in 1495. Gisperte and Sal- 
vador de Santangel were reconciled at Huesca in 1499. Leonardo 
de Santangel was burnt at Huesca, July 8, 1489, and his mother 
two days afterwards. Violante de Santangel and Simon de Sant- 
angel, with Clara his wife, were reconciled at Huesca. Micer Miguel 
de Santangel of Huesca was reconciled March 1, 1489.’ To estimate 
properly this terrible list we must bear in mind that ‘‘reconcilia- 
tion’ involved confiscation and disabilities inflicted on descend- 
ants which were almost equivalent to extinguishing a family. In 
1513 Folsona, wife of Alonso de Santangel, petitioned Ferdinand 
saying that her husband, Alonso de Santangel, thirty years before, 
had fled from the Inquisition and his property had been confis- 
cated, leaving her in poverty with four young children; she had 
withheld eighty libras of his effects and had spent them; now her 


? Libro Verde (Revista, CVI, 250-1).—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 
1.—Arch. gén. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 100.—Garibay, Compendio histérial, 
Lib. xix, cap. 1.—Amador de los Rios, III, 405. 


260 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


conscience impelled her to confess this and to sue for pardon, 
which the king graciously granted ‘‘ with our customary clemency 
and compassion.”’ One of these four children seems to be an 
Augustin de Santangel of Barbastro, son of Alonso, who as late 
as 1556, obtained relief from the disabilities consequent on his 
father’s condemnation.’ 

There was in Aragon no Converso house more powerful than 
the descendants of Alazar Usuf and his brothers who took the 
name of Sdnchez and furnished many officials of rank such as 
treasurer, bayle, dispensero mayor, etc. Of these, between 1486 
and 1503, there were burnt, in person or in effigy, Juan de Pedro 
Sanchez, Micer Alonso Sanchez, Angelina Sdnchez, Brianda 
Sanchez, Mossen Anton Sanchez, Micer Juan Sanchez, and, among 
the Tamarit, with whom they were allied by marriage, Leonor de 
Tamarit and her sister Olalia, Valentina de Tamarit and Beatriz 
de Tamarit. Of the same family there were penanced Aldonza 
Sanchez, Anton Sanchez, Juan de Juan Sanchez, Luis de Juan 
Sanchez, Juan Sanchez the jurist, Martin Sanchez, Maria San- 
chez and Pedro Sanchez.’ It is unnecessary to multiply examples 
of what was going on in Spain during those dreadful years, for 
Aragon was exceptional only in so far as the industrious notary, 
Juan de Anchfas, kept and compiled the records that should attest 
the indelible stain on descendants. There is something awful in 
the hideous coolness with which he summarizes the lists of victims 
too numerous to particularize: ‘‘The Gémez of Huesca are New 
Christians and many of them have been abandoned to the secular 
arm and many others have been reconciled’’; ‘‘The Zaportas and 
Benetes of Monzon . . . many of them have been con- 
demned and abandoned to the secular arm.’” 


CATALONIA. 


Catalonia had of old been even more intractable than her sister 
kingdoms and fully as jealous of her ancient rights and liberties. 
The Capitols de Cort, or fueros granted in the successive Cortes, 
were ordered to be systematically arranged and fairly written 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 3, fol. 237; Libro 4, fol. 223. 
? Libro Verde (Revista, CV, 568). 3 Ibidem (Revista, CVI, 266, 269). 


Cuap. V] RESISTANCE 261 


out in two volumes, one in Latin and the other in Limosin; these 
volumes were to be kept in the Diputacion, secured by chains but 
open to the public, so that every citizen might know his rights. 
Whenever the king or his officials violated them by edict or 
act, the Diputados—a standing committee of the Cértes—were 
instructed to oppose by every lawful means the invasion of their 
liberties until the obnoxious measure should be withdrawn.! 
Apparently forewarned as to Ferdinand’s designs, Catalonia 
had manifested her independence by refusing to send representa- 
tives to the Cortes of Tarazona in January, 1484, alleging that it 
was illegal to summon them beyond the boundaries of the prin- 
cipality.” The Catalans had thus escaped assenting to the juris- 
diction of Torquemada, but this in no way hindered Ferdinand 
from sending, May 11th, to Juan de Medina, his receiver of con- 
fiscations at Barcelona, a list of salaries similar to that drawn up 
at the same time for Saragossa, although the names of appointees 
were left in blank.’ The citizens met this by sending him a con- 
sulta affirming their rights and meanwhile prevented the old 
inquisitors from manifesting any increase of activity. To this 
Ferdinand replied from Cérdova, August 4th, expressing his 
extreme dissatisfaction. They need not, he assured them, be 
alarmed as to their privileges and liberties, for the Inquisition 
will do nothing to violate them and will use no cruelty but will 
treat with all clemency those who return to the faith. Further 
remonstrance, he adds, will be useless for it is his unchangeable de- 
termination that the Inquisition shall perform its work and oppo- 
sition to it will be more offensive to him than any other disservice.‘ 
The Catalans were obdurate to both blandishments and threats. 
Barcelona claimed, as a special privilege, derived directly from the 
Holy See, that it had a right to an inquisitor of its own and that 
it could not be subjected to an inquisitor-general. It already had 
its inquisitor in the person of Juan Comte, who apparently gave 
the people no trouble and served as a convenient impediment to 
the extension of Torquemada’s jurisdiction, especially as he held 
a papal commission. To mect this obstacle Ferdinand wrote, 
October 12th, to his ambassador at Rome, that the inquisitors were 
not doing their duty, wherefore he earnestly requested that, at the 
earliest possible moment, further power be granted to him and to 


1 Libre dels quatre Senyals, cap. xiv (Barcelona, 1634, p. 34). 
2 Zurita, Afiales, Lib. xx, cap. lvi. 
8 Arch. gén. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 16. * Ibidem, fol. 24, 


262 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


Isabella and Torquemada to appoint and remove at pleasure 
officials who should be full inquisitors and not merely commis- 
sioners, as the franchises of the cities provide that they shall not 
be subjected to commissioners." The Catalan Conversos doubtless 
understood how to counteract with the curia the king’s desires, 
for nine months later, July 9, 1485, Ferdinand again wrote to his 
auditor apostélico that the Inquisition in Aragon, Catalonia and 
Valencia was much impeded by the papal commissions granted 
to Dominican masters of theology and other persons, and that he 
must at once procure a bull revoking all commissions to act as 
inquisitors, especially those of Fray Juan Comte of Barcelona 
and Archdeacon Mercader of Valencia; Torquemada must have 
a fresh appointment for the Aragonese kingdoms and especially 
as inquisitor of Barcelona, with faculty to subdelegate his powers.’ 
It is possible that Cardinal Borgia’s interest in his Vicar-general 
Mercader neutralized the efforts of Ferdinand’s agents, for six 
months passed away without the request being granted and, in 
January, 1486, the king ventured the experiment of sending two 
appointees of Torquemada, the Dominicans Juan Franco and 
Guillen Casells, with an Executoria pro Inquisitoribus apud Cata- 
loniam, addressed to all the officials, who were ordered under pain 
of five thousand gold florins to receive and convey them safely, 
to aid them in their work, to arrest and imprison in chains whom- 
soever they might designate and to inflict due punishment on all 
whom they might abandon to the secular arm.’ This energetic 
movement was as fruitless as its predecessors and some weeks 
later an order was issued to the inquisitors at Saragossa to reim- 
burse, from the pecuniary penances in their hands, the expenses 
of the cleric who had been sent to Barcelona and also to pay fifty 
libras each to Esteban Gago, sent there as alguazil and Jaime 
Millan as notary, in order to provide for their support.‘ At the 
same time Ferdinand expressed the hope that the Barcelonese 
tribunal would soon be in working order, and in this he was not 
wholly disappointed. 

Innocent VIII yielded at last and, by a brief of February 6, 
1486, under pretext that they had been too zealous, he removed 


1 Arch. gén. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 27. This request was repeated 
soon afterward.—Ibidem, fol. 45. 2 Ibidem, fol. 59. 

3 Ibidem, fol. 72. It is probably to this attempt that may be attributed a 
tumult against the Inquisition at Lérida, alluded to by Llorente, Afiales, I, 93. 

* Arch. gén. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 86, 89. 


Cuap. V] BARCELONA SUBMITS 263 


all inquisitors holding papal commissions—in Aragon Juan 
Colivera, Juan de Epila, Juan Franco and Guillen Casells, in 
Valencia Juan Orts and Mateo Mercader and in Barcelona Juan 
Comte; he appointed Torquemada as special inquisitor for Barce- 
lona, with power of subdelegation and, apparently to prepare for 
expected resistance, he authorized the Bishops of Cérdova and 
Leon and the Abbot of St. Emelian of Burgos to suppress all oppo- 
sition, especially on the part of Juan Comte, while he expressly 
set aside the privileges of the city.t In spite of this formidable 
missive nearly eighteen months elapsed before Barcelona was 
reduced to submission, and Torquemada’s final appointee, Alonso 
de Espina, was able to enter the city. When at last he succeeded, 
July 5, 1487, we are told that the Lieutenant-general of the Prin- 
cipality, the Bishops of Urgel, Tortosa and Gerona and many 
gentlemen and citizens sallied forth to greet him, but there is no 
mention made of the Diputados, or the local magistracy, or the 
canons joining in the reception, and it was not until July 30th that 
the municipal officials took the oath of obedience to him.’ 

He probably still found obstacles in his path, for it was not until 
December 14th that the first procession of penitents took place, 
consisting only of twenty-one men and twenty-nine women, fol- 
lowed, a week later, by another in which the participants were 
scourged.? The smallness of these numbers, as the result of five 
months’ work, showed that the Edict of Grace had met an ungrate- 
ful response and the first public auto, celebrated January 25, 
1488, furnished only four living victims and the effigies of twelve 
fugitives. As already remarked elsewhere, the fear spread abroad 
by the advent of the Inquisition, after so long a struggle, caused 
the greater part of those who had reason for fear to seek safety 
in flight, in spite of the edicts forbidding expatriation. During the 
whole of the year 1488 the number of burnings amounted only to 
seven and in 1489 there were but three. It was doubtless owing 
to the lukewarmness of the local magistracy that, in the earlier 
autos, the sufferers were spared the extreme penalty of concrema- 
tion and were mercifully strangled before the pile was lighted.‘ 


1 Archivio Vaticano, Regest. 685 (Innoc. VIII), fol. 346. Cf. Bibl. nacional, 
Seccion de MSS., D, 118, p. 92.—Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Lib. I, fol. 31. 

2 Manuall de Novells Ardits, IJI, 58, 61 (Barcelona, 1894). 

3 Ibidem, III, 66. 

4 Carbonell de Gestis Hereticorum (Coleccion de Doc. de la Corona de Aragon, 
XXVIII, 13, 16, 29). 


264 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


In fact, a royal cédula of March 15, 1488, ordering afresh all 
officials torender aid and support to the Inquisition, under penalty 
of two thousand florins, would seem to argue no little slackness on 
their part.’ 

The jurisdiction of the tribunal of Barcelona was extensive, 
comprehending the dioceses of Barcelona, Tarragona, Vich, 
Gerona, Lérida, Urgel and Elna; the inquisitors were industrious 
and visited many portions of their territory, for we have record, 
during the remainder of the century, of autos de fe held in Tarra- 
gona, Gerona, Perpignan, Balaguer and Lérida, but as late as 
November 18, 1500, Ferdinand complains that in Rosellon the 
Inquisition had not yet been put fairly in operation and that no 
effort had been made to secure the confiscations.’ 

The imperiousness with which the inquisitors exercised their 
authority to break the independent spirit of the Catalans is well 
illustrated by a trifling but significant incident in 1494. The city 
of Tarragona had established a quarantine against Barcelona on 
account of pestilence. On June 18th the inquisitor, Antonio de 
Contreras, with all his officials, presumably fleeing from the pest, 
presented himself at the gates and demanded admittance. The 
vicar-general of the archbishop, the canons and the royal and 
local officials came to meet him and explained the situation, ask- 
ing him to remain in some convenient place in the neighborhood 
for some days. His reply was to give them the delay of three 
Misereres in which to open their gates under pain of major excom- 
munication and interdict, whereupon they left him, after inter- 
jecting an appeal to the Holy See. He recited the Miserere thrice, 
commanded his notary to knock at the gate and then fulminated 
his censures, with an additional order that no notary but his own 
should make record of the affair. He then withdrew to the neigh- 
boring Dominican convent, whence he sent his excommunication 
to be affixed to the town-gates. While at supper, Ciprian Corte, a 
scrivener, came and served him with a notice of the appeal to 
Rome and was seized and confined in the convent prison. During 
the night the vicar-general with a crowd of citizens surrounded 
the convent in a fashion so threatening that the scrivener was 
released. It was not until July 18th that the inquisitor entered 
Tarragona, when he suspended the excommunication and inter- 


+ Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Leg. 17, fol. 26. 
? Carbonell, pp. 36, 39, 40, 52, 83, 85, 137, 139, 140, 148, 149.—Archivo de 
Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 1. 


Cuap. V] SUPREMACY OF THE INQUISITION 265 


‘dict and took testimony as to the affair, banishing a man who 
said that Vich had similarly refused to break a quarantine for an 
inquisitor. Finally, on September 5th all the dignitaries, eccle- 
siastical and secular, with the leading citizens, were assembled 
in the chapel of the chapter, in presence of the inquisitor and of 
Don Juan de Lanuza, the Lieutenant-general of Catalonia. There 
they humbly begged for pardon and absolution and offered to 
undergo any penance that he might inflict; he made them swear 
obedience to him and appointed the following Sunday for the 
penance, when they were all obliged to attend mass as penitents, 
with lighted candles in their hands, thus incurring an indelible 
stigma on themselves and their posterity.’ 

Men who wielded their awful and irresponsible power in this 
arbitrary fashion were not to be restrained by law or custom and 
from their tyranny there was no appeal save to the king, who 
was resolved that no one but himself should check them. He 
had already, by a cédula of March 26, 1488, forbidden all secular 
officials, from the leutenant-general down, from taking cogni- 
zance of anything concerning the subordinates and familiars of the 
Holy Office, under penalty of the royal wrath and a fine of two 
thousand florins and when, in 1505, the Diputados of Catalonia 
were involved in some trifling quarrel with the inquisitors and 
represented to Ferdinand that their jurisdiction was in deroga- 
tion of the constitution of the land, he sternly replied that the 
jurisdiction of the faith and the execution of its sentences per- 
tained to the Inquisition; that this jurisdiction was supreme over 
all others and that there was no fuero or law that could obstruct 
it.” This fateful declaration became practically engrafted upon 
Spanish public law. 

It was impossible that such irresponsible power should not be 
abused and there speedily commenced a series of complaints from 
the Catalan authorities which, as we shall see hereafter, continued 
with little intermission until the revolt of 1640. At the present 
time, however, Ferdinand showed a disposition to curb the abuses 
inevitable under the system and, in letters of August 16th and 
20th and September 3, 1502, to the inquisitors of Barcelona, he 
enclosed a memorial from the Diputados of Catalonia, accom- 
panying it with a severe rebuke. The chief source of complaint 
was that the receiver of confiscations bought up claims and prose- 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 927, fol. 303. 
2 Ibidem, Libro 2, fol. 19.—MSS. of Bodleian Library, Arch. S, 130. 


266 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boor I 


cuted them through the irresistible machinery of the tribunal. 
In a sample instance Franci Ballester made over to the receiver 
for 100 libras a debt of 228 due by Juan de Trillo which was then 
collected through the Inquisition. Ferdinand said that he had 
frequently forbidden this practice and he ordered the inquisitors 
to excommunicate the receiver if he persisted init. The receiver 
then contented himself with a smaller profit and proceeded, in the 
case of the confiscated estate of a certain Mahul, to collect from it 
debts for a commission of ten per cent., whereby the creditors 
with the weakest claims got most of the money. Again Ferdinand 
prohibited this, September 9th, ordering all funds to be paid in 
to the tabla of Barcelona, for equitable distribution among the 
creditors and all commissions to be refunded.’ At the same time 
there was no talk of the only effective way of cutting up these 
practices by the roots—that of discharging the knavish receiver. 
This tenderness for official malfeasance continued throughout the 
career of the Inquisition and prevented any effective reform. 


THE BALEARIC ISLES. 


Majorca claimed to be a separate and independent kingdom, 
governed by its own customs and only united dynastically with 
Catalonia. In 1439 it complained that its franchises were vio- 
lated by the queen-regent when she summoned citizens to appear 
before her on the mainland, for they were entitled to be tried 
nowhere but at home, and her husband Alfonso V admitted the 
justice of this and promised its observance for the future? The 
frequent repetition of this privilege shows how highly it was 
prized and it rendered necessary a separate tribunal for the Bal- 
earic Isles. This had long been in operation under the old insti- 
tution and the inquisitor at this period was Fray Nicolas Merola 
who was as inert as his brethren elsewhere. The records of his 
office show that under him there were no relaxations; that in 
1478 there were four Judaizers reconciled; in 1480, one; in 
1482, two and in 1486, one. He was probably stimulated to 


* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 2, fol. 5, 7, 10; Libro 13, fol. 385, 
386. 
* Ordinacions del Regne de Mallorca, pp. 64, 85, 372-3 (Mallorca, 1663). 


Cuap. V] THE BALEARIC ISLES 267 


greater energy by the prospect of removal, for in 1487 the number 
increased to eight.’ 

It was not until the following year, 1488, that the new Inquisi- 
tion was introduced, when Fray Merola was replaced by the 
doctors Pedro Pérez de Munebrega and Sancho Martin.? Their 
Edict of Grace was so successful that three hundred and thirty- 
eight persons came forward, confessed and were reconciled, 
August 18, 1488, in addition to sixteen reconeiled, August 13th, 
after trial. Evidently the prosperous Converso population recog- 
nized that the new institution was vastly more efficient than the 
old. There must undoubtedly have been some popular efferves- 
cence, of which the details have not reached us, for the inquisitors 
were removed and replaced by a native, Fray Juan Ramon, but, 
if the change calmed the agitation it did not diminish the activity 
of the tribunal, for the records of the year 1489 show seven autos 
in which there were ten reconciliations, forty-four relaxations in 
effigy, one of bones exhumed and six in person. A momentary 
pause followed, for, in 1490, we find only the reconciliation of 
ninety-six penitents, March 26th, under the Edict of Grace. 
Then, in 1491, another Edict was published, of which, on July 
10th and 30th, a hundred and thirty-four persons availed them- 
selves, besides two hundred and ninety of those already recon- 
ciled in 1488 and 1490, who had relapsed and were readmitted as 
a special mercy. In addition to these the records of 1491 show 
numerous autos in which there were fifty-seven reconciliations, 
eighteen relaxations in effigy and eighteen in person. As else- 
where, the delay in introducing the new Inquisition had given 
opportunity for flight and for some years the chief business of the 
tribunal was the condemnation of fugitives. Thus, in an auto of 
May 11, 1493, there were but three relaxations in person to forty- 
seven in effigy and, in one of June 14, 1497, there was no living 
victim, the bones of one were burnt and the effigies of fifty-nine.® 

As usual these proceedings against the dead and absent were 
productive of abundant confiscations and the fears of descendants 
were thoroughly aroused lest some aberration of an ancestor 
should be discovered which would sweep away their fortunes. 
This gave rise to the expedient of compositions, of which we shall 
see more hereafter, as a sort of insurance against confiscation. 


1 Historia general del Reyno de Mallorca, III, 362 (Palma, 1841).—Archivo 
de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 595. 
* Hist. gen. de Mallorca, III, 363. § Archivo de Simancas, ubz sup, 


268 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


In the present case a letter from Ferdinand, January 28, 1498, 
to the inquisitor and the receiver announces that these people 
are coming forward with offers and he orders the officials to make 
just and reasonable bargains with them and report to him, when 
he will decide what is most to his advantage. In this and other 
ways the operations of the tribunal were beginning to bring in 
more than its expenses, for, February 2, 1499, there is an order 
given on the receiver Matheo de Morrano to pay to the receiver 
of Valencia two hundred gold ducats to cancel some debts that 
were pressing on the royal conscience, followed soon after by 
other orders to pay four hundred and fifty ducats to the royal 
treasury and fifty florins to the nunnery of Santa Clara of Calata- 
yud. The confiscating zeal of the officials was stimulated, Feb- 
ruary 21, 1498, by an allowance to Morrano of three thousand 
sueldos, in addition to his salary, in reward of his eminent ser- 
vices and another, March 2d, of a hundred libras mallorquines to 
the notary Pere Prest. It was not always easy to trace the prop- 
erty which the unfortunates naturally sought to conceal and a 
liberal offer of fifty per cent. was made to informers who should 
reveal or discover it.’ 

It was as difficult to reconcile the Mallorquins as the Catalans 
to the new Inquisition. In 1517 the Suprema was obliged to 
order the viceroy not to maltreat the officials or obstruct them 
in the performance of their duty, and at the same time, the inquis- 
itors were instructed to proceed against him if he did not cease to 
trouble them. Apparently he did not heed the warning for, in 
1518, the inquisitor was formally commanded to prosecute him. 
What followed we have no means of knowing, but apparently the 
viceroy had full popular sympathy, for soon afterwards there was 
a rising, led by the Bishop of Elna, whose parents had been con- 
demned by the tribunal. The inquisitor fled and the populace was 
about to burn the building and the records, when the firmness of 
the Bishop of Majorca, at the risk of his life, suppressed the 
tumult. It was probably this disturbance that called forth, in 
1520, an adjuration from the Suprema to the viceroy and the 
ecclesiastical and secular authorities, not to permit the ill-treat- 
ment of the inquisitor and other officials. It was impossible, 
however, to preserve the peace and, in 1530, we find the viceroy, 
his assessor and officials, under excommunication as the result 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 1. 


CHap. V] DISCONTENT 269 


of a competencia or conflict of jurisdiction. Even more significant 
was the imprisonment and trial, in 1534, of the regent or president 
of the royal high court of justice, resulting in the imposition, in 
1537, of a fine so excessive that the Suprema ordered its reduc- 
tion.’ This was but the beginning and we shall see hereafter how 
perpetual were the embroilments of the tribunal with both the 
civil and the ecclesiastical authorities. 


With more or less resistance the new Inquisition was thus 
imposed on the various provinces subject to the crown of Aragon. 
The pretence put forward to secure its introduction, that it in no 
way violated thefueros and liberties of the land, was soon dropped 
and, as we have seen, it was boldly pronounced to be superior to 
all law. For awhile this was submitted to in silence, but the ever- 
encroaching arrogance of the officials, their extension of their 
jurisdiction over matters unconnected with the faith and their 
abuse of their irresponsible prerogatives aroused opposition which 
at length found opportunity for expression. In 1510 the repre- 
sentatives of Aragon, Catalonia and Valencia were, for the first 
time, assembled together in the Cértes of Monzon. They came 
with effusive enthusiasm, stimulated by the conquest of Oran 
and Algiers and the desire to retrieve the disaster of Gerbes and 
they voted for Ferdinand the unprecedented servicio or tax-levy 
of five hundred thousand libras, obtaining in return the abolition 
of the Santa Hermandad.’ Yet even this enthusiasm did not pre- 
vent murmurs of discontent, and complaints were made that the 
Inquisition assumed jurisdiction over cases of usury, blasphemy, . 
bigamy, necromancy and the like and that the privileges and 
exemptions enjoyed by the officials led to their unnecessary mul- 
tiplication, rendering the tribunals oppressive to those who bore 
the burdens of the state. Ferdinand eluded reform by promising 
it for the future and the Cértes were dissolved without positive 
action. When they next met at Monzon, in 1512, they were in a 
less confiding mood and it is probable that popular agitation must 
have assumed a threatening aspect, sufficient to compel Ferdinand 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 72, P. 11, fol. 6, 7, 121, 125; Libro 73, 
fol. 116-171; Libro 77, fol. 228; Libro 78, fol. 60. La ee pp. 217-18. 

2 Zurita, Hees del Bee Herendg, Lib. Ix, cap. xiv. 

§ Llorente, Afiales, II, 11. 


9270 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


to yield to their demands. An elaborate series of articles was 
drawn up, or rather two, one for Aragon and the other for Cata- 
lonia, nearly identical in character, which received the royal 
assent. It is significant that, with the exception of a clause as to 
appeals, these articles do not concern themselves with the prose- 
cution of heresy but are confined to the excesses with which the 
tribunals and their underlings afflicted the faithful. 

The reform demanded by Catalonia embraced thirty-four 
articles, a few of which may serve to suggest the abuses that had 
grown so rankly. An especial grievance was the multiplication 
of officials—not only those engaged in the work of the tribunal 
but the unsalaried familiars scattered everywhere and the ser- 
vants and slaves of all concerned, who all claimed the /wero, or 
jurisdiction of the Inquisition, with numerous privileges and 
exemptions that rendered them a most undesirable element in 
society. It was demanded that the number of familiars in Cata- 
lonia should be reduced to thirty-four, whose names should be 
made known; that under the guise of servants should be included 
only those actually resident with their masters or employers; 
that no one guilty of a grave offence should be appointed to. 
office; that the privilege of carrying arms should be restricted to 
those who bore commissions, in default of which they could be 
disarmed like other citizens; that the claim to exemption from 
local taxes and imposts be abandoned; that officials caught jflag- 
rante delicto in crime should be subject to arrest by secular officials 
without subjecting the latter to prosecution; that civil suits 
should be tried by the court of the defendant; that the conmon 
clause in contracts by which one party subjected himself to what- 
ever court the other might name should be held not to include the 
Inquisition; that the rule forbidding officials to engage in trade 
should be enforced; that officials buying claims or property in 
litigation should not transfer the cases to the Inquisition, nor 
use it to collect their rents; that inquisitors should not issue safe- 
conducts except to witnesses coming to testify; that in cases of 
confiscation, when the convict had been reputed a good Christian, 
parties who had bought property from him, had paid their debts 
to him or had redeemed rent-charges, should not lose the property 
or be obliged to pay the debts a second time; that the dowry of a 
Catholic wife should not be confiscated because her father or 
husband should be subsequently convicted of heresy; that posses- 
sion for thirty years by a good Catholic should bar confiscation of 


Cuap. V] THE CONCORDIA OF MONZON 971 


property formerly owned by those now convicted of heresy and 
that the inquisitors should not elude this prescription of time by 
deducting periods of war, of minority, of ignorance of the fise 
and other similar devices; that the inquisitors should withdraw 
their decree prohibiting all dealings with Conversos, which was 
not only a serious restraint of trade but involved much danger 
to individuals acting through ignorance. As regards the exten- 
sion of jurisdiction over subjects unconnected with heresy, the 
Inquisition was not in future to take cognizance of usury, bigamy, 
blasphemy, and sorcery except in cases inferring erroneous belief. 
Remaining under excommunication for a year involved suspicion 
of heresy and the Edict of Faith required the denunciation of all 
such cases to the Inquisition, but as there were innumerable 
decrees of zpso facto excommunications and others which were 
privately issued, it was impossible to know who was or was not 
under the ban, wherefore the tribunal was not to take action except 
in cases where the censure had been publicly announced. The 
extent to which the inquisitors had carried their arbitrary assump- 
tion of authority is indicated by an article forbidding them in 
the future from interfering with the Diputados of Catalonia or 
their officials in matters pertaining to their functions and the 
rights of the State and in the imposts of the cities, towns, and 
villages. The only reform proposed as to procedure is an article 
providing that appeals may lie from the local tribunal to the 
inquisitor-general and Suprema, with suspension of sentences 
until they are heard. But there is a hideous suggestiveness in 
the provision that, when perjured testimony has led to the execu- 
tion of an innocent man, the inquisitors shall do justice and shall 
not prevent the king from punishing the false witnesses. 

The independence of the Inquisition, as an imperium in imperio, 
is exhibited in the fact that its acceptance was deemed necessary 
to each individual article, an acceptance expressed by the sub- 
scription to each of Plaw a su Reverendisstma senyoria, the sen- 
yoria being that of Inquisitor-general Enguera. To confirm this 
he and the inquisitors were required to swear in a manner exhibit- 
ing the profound distrust entertained of them. The oath was 
to observe each and every article; it was to be taken as a public 
act before a notary of the Inquisition, who was to attest it offi- 
cially and deliver it to the president of the Cértes, and authentic 
copies were to be supplied at the price of five sueldos to all 
demanding them. All future inquisitors, whether general or 


AEA THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


local, were to take the same oath on assuming office and all this 
was repeated in various formulas so as to leave no loop-hole for 
equivocation. Ferdinand also took an oath promising to obtain 
from the pope orders that all inquisitors, present and future, 
should observe the articles and also that, whenever requested by 
the Cértes, the Diputados or the councillors of Barcelona, he 
would issue the necessary letters and provisions for their enforce- 
ment.’ This was the first of the agreements which became known 
as Concordias—adjustments between the popular demands and 
the claims of the Holy Office. We shall have frequent occasion 
to hear of them in the future, for they were often broken and 
renewed and fresh sources of quarrel were never lacking. The 
present one was not granted without a binding consideration, for 
the tribunal of Barcelona was granted six hundred libras a year, 
secured upon the public revenues.’ 

If the Catalans distrusted the good faith of king and inquisitor- 
general they were not without justification, for the elaborate 
apparatus of oaths proved a flimsy restraint on those who would 
endure no limitation on their arbitrary and irresponsible author- 
ity. At first Ferdinand manifested a desire to uphold the Con-. 
cordia and to restrain the inquisitors who commenced at once to 
violate it. The city of Perpignan complained that the prescription 
of time was disregarded and that the duplicate payment of old 
debts was demanded, whereupon Ferdinand wrote, October 24, 
1512, sharply ordering the strict observance of the terms agreed 
upon and the revocation of any acts contravening them.* Before 
long however his policy changed and he sought relief. For 
potentates who desired to commit a deliberate breach of faith 
there was always the resource of the authority of the Holy See 
which, among its miscellaneous attributes, had long assumed that 
of releasing from inconvenient engagements those who could 
command its favor, and Ferdinand’s power in Italy was too great 
to permit of the refusal of so trifling a request. Accordingly on 
April 30, 1513, Leo X issued a motu proprio dispensing Ferdinand 


1 Capitols concedits y decretats per lo Reverendissim don Juan Bisbe de 
Leyda e inquisidor general a supplicatio dels tres staments de Cathalunya 
convocats en los Corts de Montso ha 2 de Agost, 1512 (Pragmaticas y altres Drets 
de Cathalunya, Lib. 1, Tit. viii, cap. 1; Lib. 1, Tit. ix, cap. 3, 3 6. Barcelona, 
1589). 

The articles agreed upon for Aragon are given by Llorente, Afiales, II, 19. 

2 Capitols y Actes de Cort, fol. xxviii (Barcelona, 1603). 

3 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 3, fol. 200. 


Cuar. V] MERCADERS INSTRUCTIONS 213 


and Bishop Enguera from their oaths to observe the Concordia of 
Monzon.* 

The popular demands, however, had been too emphatically 
asserted to be altogether ignored and an attempt was made to 
satisfy them by a series of instructions drawn up, under date of 
August 28, 1514, by Bishop Luis Mercader of Tortosa, who had 
succeeded Enguera as inquisitor-general. These comprised many 
of the reforms in the Concordia, modified somewhat to suit 
inquisitorial views, as, for instance, the number of armed familiars 
permitted for Barcelona was twenty-five, with ten each for other 
cities. From Valladolid, September 10th, Ferdinand despatched 
these instructions by Fernando de Montemayor, Archdeacon of 
Almazan, who was going to Barcelona as visitor or inspector of 
the tribunal. It was not until December 1ith that they were 
read in Barcelona in presence of the inquisitors and of representa- 
tives of Catalonia. The latter demanded time for their considera- 
tion and a copy was given to them. Another meeting was held, 
January 10, 1515, and a third on January 25th, in which the 
instructions were published and the inquisitors promised to obey 
them. There is no record that the Catalans accepted them as a 
fulfilment of the Concordia and, if they were asked to do so, it was 
merely as a matter of policy. In a letter of January 4th to the 
archdeacon, Ferdinand assumes that the assent of the Catalans 
was a matter of indifference; the instructions were to be pub- 
lished without further parley and no reference to Rome was 
requisite as the privileges of the Inquisition were not curtailed 
by them. 

Subsequent Cortes were held at Monzon and Lérida, where the 
popular dissatisfaction found expression in further complaints 
and demands, leading to some concessions on the part of Ferdi- 
nand. The temper of the people was rising and manifested itself 
in occasional assaults, sometimes fatal, on inquisitorial officials, 
to facilitate the punishment of which Leo X, by a brief of January 
28, 1515, authorized inquisitors to try such delinquents and hand 
them over to the secular arm for execution, without incurring the 
“irregularity” consequent on judgements of blood. Ferdinand 


1 Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Libro I, fol. 137. Confirmed by a second 
and fuller one, September 2, 1513.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 
921, fol. 21, 23. 

? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 933; Libro 3, fol. 316. 

3 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 8, fol. 323, 456.—Parecer del Doctor 
Martin Real (MSS. of Bodleian Library, Arch. 8, 130). 

: 18 


274 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


was too shrewd to provoke his subjects too far; he recognized that 
the overbearing arrogance of the inquisitors and their illegal 
extension of their authority gave great offence, even to the well- 
affected, and he was ready to curb their petulance. A case occur- 
ring in May, 1515, shows how justifiable were the popular com- 
plaints and gave him opportunity to administer a severe rebuke. 
It was the law in Aragon that, when the Diputados appointed any 
one as lieutenant to the Justicia, if he refused to serve they were 
to remove his name from the lists of those eligible to public office. 
A certain Micer Manuel, so appointed, refused to serve and to 
escape the penalty procured from the inquisitors of Saragossa 
letters prohibiting, under pain of excommunication, the Diputados 
from striking off his name. This arbitrary interference with 
public affairs gave great offence and Ferdinand sharply told the 
inquisitors not to meddle with matters that in no way concerned 
their office; the Diputados were under oath to execute the law 
and the letters must be at once revoked.’ Finally he recognized 
that the demands of the Cértes of Monzon had been justified and 
that he had done wrong in violating the Concordia of 1512. One 
of his latest acts was a cédula of December 24, 1515, announcing 
to the inquisitors that he had applied to the Holy See for con- 
firmation of the agreements made,and sworn to in the Cortes of 
Monzon and Lérida; there was no doubt that this would speedily 
be granted, wherefore he straitly commanded, under pain of for- 
feiture of office, that the articles must not be violated in any 
manner, direct or indirect, but must be observed to the letter; 
the inquisitor-general had agreed to this and would swear to com- 
ply with the bull when it should come.’ 

Ferdinand died January 23, 1516, followed in June by Inquisitor- 
general Mercader. Leo X probably waited to learn whether the 
new monarch Charles desired to continue the policy of his grand- 
father. It is true that he had dispensed Ferdinand and Enguera 
from their oaths in view of the great offence to God and danger 
to conscience involved in the observance of the Concordia, but 
a word from the monarch was sufficient to overcome his scruples. 
What Ferdinand had felt it necessary to concede could not be 
withheld when, in the youth and absence of Charles, his repre- 
sentatives could scarce repress the turbulent elements of civil 
discord. Accordingly Leo confirmed all the articles of both the 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 3, fol. 337. 
2 Ibidem, fol. 355. 


Cuap. V] FURTHER DEMANDS 275 


Catalan and Aragonese Concordias by the bull Pastoralis offcti, 
August 1, 1516, in which he declared that the officials of the 
Inquisition frequently transgressed the bounds of reason and 
propriety in their abuse of their privileges, immunities and 
exemptions and that their overgrown numbers reduced almost to 
nullity the jurisdiction of the ordinary ecclesiastical and secular 
courts. ‘This action, he says, is taken at the especial prayer of 
King Charles and Queen Juana and all inquisitors and officials 
contravening its prescriptions, if they do not, within three days 
after summons, revoke their unlawful acts, are subject to excom- 
munication lata sententte, deprivation of office and perpetual dis- 
ability for re-employment, ipso jacto. Moreover the Archbishops 
of Saragossa and Tarragona were authorized and required, when- 
ever called upon by the authorities, to compel the observance of 
the bull by ecclesiastical censures and other remedies without 
appeal, invoking if necessary the secular arm.’ 

Thus, after four years of struggle, the Concordias of 1512 were 
confirmed in the most absolute manner and the relations between 
the Inquisition and the people appeared to be permanently 
settled. The inquisitors however, as usual, refused to be bound 
by any limitations. They claimed, and acted on the claim, that 
the papal bull of confirmation was surreptitious and not entitled 
to obedience and that both the Concordias and the Instructions 
of Bishop Mercader were invalid as being restrictions impeding 
the jurisdiction of the Holy Office? On the other hand the people 
grew more restive and increased their demands for relief. The 
occasion presented itself when Charles came to Spain to assume 
possession of his mother’s dominions. At Cértes held in Sara- 
gossa, May, 1518, he received the allegiance of Aragon and swore 
to observe the fueros of the Cortes of Saragossa, Tarazona and 
Monzon. Money was soon wanted to supply the reckless liber- 
ality with which he filled the pouches of his greedy Flemings, 
and towards the end of the year he summoned another assembly 
to grant him a subsidio. It agreed to raise 200,000 libras but 


1 Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Libro 1 de copias, fol. 219.—PragmAaticas 
y altres Drets de Cathalunya, Lib. 1, Tit. viii, cap. 2. 

Ferdinand must have resolved on this policy about a year earlier, but delayed 
putting it into execution. In the Simancas archives, Patronato real, Inquisicion, 
Leg. tinico, fol. 6, there is a similar brief, but without the executive clauses, 
addressed to him and commencing Exponi nobis nuper fecisti. It bears date 
May 12, 1515, and was apparently held by him in reserve. 

2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Leg. 17, fol. 2. 


276 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


coupled this with a series of thirty-one articles, much more 
advanced than anything hitherto demanded in Aragon—in fact 
copied with little change from those agreed to in Castile by Jean 
le Sauvage and abandoned in consequence of his death—articles 
which revolutionized inquisitorial procedure and assimilated it 
to that of the secular criminal courts. Charles, in these matters 
was now wholly under the influence of his former tutor and 
present inquisitor-general Cardinal Adrian. He wanted the 
money, however, and he gave an equivocal consent to the articles; 
it was, he said, his will that in each and all the holy canons should 
be observed, with the decrees of the Holy See and without 
attempting anything to the contrary. If doubts arose the pope 
should: be asked to decide them; if any one desired to accuse 
inquisitors or officials, he could do so before the inquisitor-general, 
who would call in counsellors and administer justice, or, if the 
crime appertained to the secular courts, he would see that justice 
was speedy. This declaration, with the interpretation to be put 
on each and every article by the pope, he promised under oath to 
observe and enforce and he further swore not to seek dispensation 
from this oath or to avail himself of it if obtained. The people - 
were amply justified in distrusting their rulers, for Charles sub- 
sequently instructed the Count of Cifuentes, his ambassador at 
Rome, to procure the revocation of the articles and a dispensation 
from his oath to observe them.’ 

Charles had thus shuffled off from his shoulders to those of the 
pope the responsibility for this grave alteration in inquisitorial 
procedure which, by forcing the Holy Office to administer open 
justice, would have diminished so greatly its powers of evil. The 
question was thus transferred to Rome and the Cortes lost no 
time in seeking to obtain from Leo X the confirmation of the 
articles. A letter requesting this was procured from Charles and 
was forwarded to Rome with a copy of the articles and of Charles’s 
oath, officially authenticated by Juan Prat, the notary of the 
Cértes. The papers were sent to Rome by a certain Diego de las 
Casas, a Converso of Seville who, as his subsequent history shows, 
must have been amply provided with the funds necessary to 
secure a favorable hearing. 

The situation was one which called for active measures on the 
part of the Inquisition. The Cértes dissolved January 17, 1519, 


1 Llorente, Afiales, II, 146-53. 
2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 921, fol. 76. 


CuHap. V] STRUGGLE IN SARAGOSSA 27 


and a letter of the 22d, from the Suprema to the Inquisitor of Cala- 
tayud, shows that already steps had been taken to prosecute all 
who had endeavored to influence them against the Inquisition 
or who had made complaints to Charles or Adrian.t’ A more 
effective and bolder scheme was to accuse Juan Prat of having 
falsified the series of articles sent to Rome. Charles had appointed 
a commission, consisting of the Archbishop of Saragossa, Cardinal 
Adrian and Chancellor Gattinara, to consider all matters con- 
nected with the Inquisiton; to them Prat had submitted the 
articles which they returned to him with a declaration, which 
must have been an approval as its character was studiously sup- 
pressed in the subsequent proceedings. Notwithstanding this the 
Saragossa inquisitors, Pedro Arbués and Toribio Saldafia promptly 
reported to Charles, who had left Saragossa for Barcelona, that 
Prat had falsified the articles and Charles, from Igualada, Feb- 
rurary 4th, replied ordering them to obey the instructions of Car- 
dinal Adrian and collect evidence as to the falsifications which 
they claimed to have discovered. They postponed action, how- 
ever, for some weeks until the archbishop had left the city and 
did not arrest Prat until March 16th. Their investigation revealed 
some trivial irregularities but nothing to invalidate the accuracy 
of the articles transmitted to Rome, yet on the 18th they com- 
municated to the Suprema the results of their labors as though 
the whole record was vitiated and Prat had been guilty of falsi- 
fication. A way thus was opened to escape from the engagements 
entered into with the Cértes. A series of articles was drawn up, 
signed by Gattinara, which was sent to Rome as the genuine one 
and urgent letters were despatched, April 30th, to all the Roman 
agents, the pope and four of the cardinals in the Spanish interest, 
stating that the official copy was falsified, the genuine one was 
that bearing Gattinara’s name, the honor of God was involved. 
and the safety of the Catholic faith and no effort was to be spared 
to secure the papal confirmation of the right articles. 

To justify this it was necessary that Prat should be convicted 
and punished. Apparently fearing that this could not be accom- 
plished in Saragossa, Cardinal Adrian ordered the inquisitors to 
send him to Barcelona for trial, in ignorance that this was in 
violation of one of the dearest of the Aragonese privileges for- 
bidding the deportation of any citizen against his will. This 
aroused a storm and the leading officials of Church and State 


? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 74, fol. 120. 


278 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


interposed so effectually with the inquisitors that Prat was 
allowed to remain in the secret prison of the Aljaferia. The 
quarrel was now assuming serious proportions; not only was the 
kingdom aflame with this attempted violation of its privileges 
but it was universally believed that Charles had granted all the 
demands of the Cértes inreturn for theservicio and hisinterference 
with the papal confirmation was bitterly resented. The Dipu- 
tados summoned the inquisitors to obey the Concordia of 1512, 
as confirmed by the bull of August 1, 1516, while awaiting con- 
firmation of the new Concordia and at the same time they called 
the barons and magnates of the realm to a conference at Fuentes, 
whence, on May 9th, they sent to Charles a remonstrance more 
emphatic than respectful, with an intimation that the servicio 
would not be collected until Prat should be released, the pre- 
text being that the papers relating to it were in his office. 

To this Charles responded loftily, May 17th, that for no personal 
interest would he neglect his soul and conscience nor, to preserve 
his kingdom, would he allow anything against the honor of God 
and to the detriment of the Holy Office. Under threat of excom- 
munication and other severe penalties he ordered the Diputados ~ 
not to convoke the Estates of the realm or to send envoys to him; 
he would comply with the Concordia and had already asked its 
confirmation of the pope—the fact being that he had on May 7th 
written to Rome—and this he repeated May 29th—to impede the 
confirmation of the official Concordia and to urge that of his own 
version. There was a rumor that the Estates on May 14th had 
resolved to take Prat from the Aljaferfa by force and to meet this, 
on May 17th, he sent the Comendador Garecfa de Loaisa to Sara- 
gossa with instructions to arm the Cofradia of San Pedro Martir— 
an association connected with the Inquisition—to raise the people 
' and to meet force with force. The authorities were to be bullied 
and told that the king would assert his sovereign authority and 
that nothing should prevent the extradition of Prat. In the 
hands of his ghostly advisers he was prepared to risk civil war in 
defence of the abuses of the Inquisition. There was fear that the 
inquisitors might be intimidated into releasing Prat and Cardinal 
Adrian took the unprecedented step of writing directly to the 
gaoler of the Aljaferfa instructing him to disobey any such orders. 

In spite of this assertion of absolutism, Charles’s orders were 
treated with contempt. The Cértes met at Azuaga, refused to 
obey his angry commands to disperse and sent to him Don Sancho 


Cuap. V] STRUGGLE IN SARAGOSSA 279 


de la Caballeria with the unpleasant message that the servicio 
would be withheld until he should grant justice to the kingdom. 
His finances, in the hands of his Flemish favorites, were in com- 
plete disorder. The Emperor Maximilian had died January 22d 
and the contest for the succession, against the gold of Francis I, 
was expensive. Moreover, in expectation of the servicio, Chiévres 
had obtained advances at usurious interest so that the expected 
funds were already nearly exhausted and, as soon as the electoral 
struggle ended in Charles’s nomination, June 28th, there came 
fresh demands for funds to prepare for his voyage to assume his 
new dignity. Chiévres therefore eagerly sought for some com- 
promise to relieve the dead-lock, but the Aragonese on the one 
hand and Cardinal Adrian on the other were intractable. The 
high-handed arrest of Prat had fatally complicated the situation. 

Charles yielded in so far as to order that Prat should not be 
removed from the kingdom and several tentative propositions 
were made as to the trial of Prat which only show how little he 
and his advisers realized the true condition of affairs. With 
wonted Aragonese tenacity the Diputados adhered to the posi- 
tion that the accuracy of the record should not be called in 
question and that the only point to be determined was whether 
the Inquisition rightfully had any jurisdiction in the matter. At 
the same time, to show that they were not seeking to elude pay- 
ment of the servicio they agreed on September 7th to levy it, 
at the same time begging Charles to release Prat. 7 

They were probably led to make this concession by a victory 
which they had gained in Rome. Both sides had been vigorously 
at work there, but the Aragonese had the advantage that Leo X 
at the moment was incensed against the Spanish Inquisition 
because of the insolent insubordination of the Toledo tribunal in 
the case of Bernardino Diaz, of which more hereafter. His 
own experience showed him of what it was capable and the 
request of the Cértes for the confirmation of the Concordia was to 
a great extent granted by three briefs, received August Ist, 
addressed respectively to the king, to Cardinal Adrian and to the 
Inquisitors of Saragossa, reducing the Inquisition to the rules of 
the common law. Charles did not allow the briefs to be pub- 
lished and, when the Diputados presented to the inquisitors the 
one addressed to them, they refused to obey it without instruc- 
tions from Adrian, whereupon, on August 8th, the Diputados 
applied to Rome for some further remedy. 


280 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


Although the briefs were thus dormant they became the cen- 
tral point of the contest. On September 24th, Charles despatched 
to Rome Lope Hurtado de Mendoza as a special envoy with long 
and detailed instructions. He had been advised, he said that the 
pope intended to issue a bull revoking all inquisitorial commis- 
sions, save that of Cardinal Adrian; that in future the bishops 
with their chapters in each see were to nominate two persons of 
whom the inquisitor-general was to select the fittest and present 
him to the pope for confirmation; the acts of these inquisitors were 
to be judicially investigated every two years, and their procedure 
was to conform to the common law and to the canons. The 
elaborate arguments which Charles urged against each feature 
of this revolutionary plan show that it was not a figment but 
was seriously proposed with likelihood of its adoption. Moreover 
he said that influences were at work to secure the removal of the 
sanbenitos of convicts from the churches, against which he earn- 
estly protested; Ferdinand had refused three hundred thousand 
ducats offered to him to procure this concession. In conclusion 
Charles declared that no importunity should shake his deter- 
mination to make no change in the Inquisition and he signifi- 
cantly expressed his desire to preserve the friendship of his Holi- 
ness. 

What secret influences were at work to effect a complete 
reversal of papal policy it would be vain to guess, but Mendoza 
had scarce time to reach Rome when he procured a brief of 
October 12th, addressed to Cardinal Adrian. In this Sadoleto’s 
choicest Latinity was employed to cover up the humiliation of 
conscious wrong-doing, in its effort to shift the responsibility to 
the shoulders of others. Charles’s letters and Mendoza’s message 
had enlightened him as to the intentions of the king with regard 
to the preservation of the faith and the reform of the Inquisition. 
He promised that he would change nothing and would publish 
nothing without the assent of the king and the information of the 
inquisitor-general, but he dwelt on the complaints that reached 
him from all quarters of the avarice and iniquity of the inquisitors; 
he warned Adrian that the infamy of the wickedness of his sub- 
delegates redounded to the dishonor of the nation and affected 
both him and the king; he was responsible and must seek to pre- 
serve his own honor and that of the king by seeing that they desist 
from the insolence with which they disregarded the papal man- 
dates and rebelled against the Holy See. 


Cap. V] STRUGGLE IN SARAGOSSA 281 


While thus the three briefs were not revoked they were practi- 
cally annulled. The indignation of the Aragonese at finding 
themselves thus juggled was warm and found expression, Jan- 
uary 30, 1520, in discontinuing the collection of the servicio. 
Charles was now at Corufia, preparing for his voyage to Flanders 
and thither, on February 3d, the Diputados sent Azor Zapata 
and Ifigo de Mendoza to procure the liberation of Prat and to 
urge Charles to obtain the confirmation of the Concordia. To 
liberate Prat without a trial was tacitly to admit the correctness 
of his record, yet, on April 21st, Cardinal Adrian issued an order 
for the fiscal to discontinue the prosecution and for the inquisitors 
to ‘‘relax’”’ Prat. This order was presented May Ist to the inquis- 
itors, but the word ‘‘relaxation’’ was that used in the delivery 
of convicts to the secular arm for burning; Prat stoutly refused 
to accept it and remained in prison. 

Charles embarked May 21st and the rest of the year 1520 was 
spent in endeavors by each side to obtain the confirmation of 
their respective formulas of the Concordia and in fruitless attempts 
by Charles to have the three briefs revoked. Though unpub- 
lished and virtually annulled they were the source of great 
anxiety to the Inquisition. The correspondence between Charles 
and his Roman agents shows perpetual insistance on his part and 
perpetual promises and evasions by the pope, sometimes on the 
flimsiest pretexts for postponement, the secret of which is prob- 
ably to be found in a report by Juan Manuel, the Spanish ambas- 
sador, on October 12th, that the pope was promised 46,000 or 
47,000 ducats if he could induce the king to let the briefs stand. 
Thus it went on throughout the year and, when Leo died, Decem- 
ber 1, 1521, the briefs were still unrevoked. 

A year earlier, however, December 1, 1520, he had confirmed 
the Concordia, in a bull so carefully drawn as not to commit the 
Holy See to either of the contesting versions. It was limited to the 
promises embraced in Charles’s oath and, as regards the articles, it 
merely said that the canons and ordinances and papal decrees 
should be inviolably observed, under pain of ipso facto excom- 
munication, dismissal from office and disability for re-appoint- 
ment. Hither side was consequently at liberty to put what con- 
struction it pleased on the papal utterance. 

Charles meanwhile had been growing more and more impatient 
for the servicio so long withheld; he had written to Adrian and also 
to the inquisitors, ordering that the Concordia of Monzon (1512) 


282 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


and that of Saragossa, according to his version, should be strictly 
obeyed, so that the abuses thus sought to be corrected should 
cease and the people should pay the impost. The inquisitors 
dallied and seem to have asked him what articles he referred to, 
for he replied, September 17th, explaining that they were those 
of Monzon and Saragossa, the latter as expressed in the paper 
signed by Adrian and Gattinara. When, therefore, he received 
the papal confirmation of December Ist he lost no time in writing, 
December 18th, to Adrian and the inquisitors announcing it and 
ordering the articles to be rigidly observed without gloss or inter- 
pretation, so that the abuses and disorders prohibited in them 
may cease, but he was careful to describe the articles as those 
agreed upon at Monzon and lately confirmed at Saragossa in the 
form adopted by Adrian and Gattinara. 

The Aragonese, on the other hand, adhered to their version. 
The bull of confirmation seems to have reached Saragossa through 
Flanders, accompanied by a letter from Charles and it was not 
until January 15, 1521, that the Diputados wrote to Adrian enclos- 
ing the royal letter and a copy of the bull. In obeying it, he con- 
ceded the Aragonese version of the Concordia, though with a bad 
grace. From Tordesillas, January 28th, he wrote to the Dipu- 
tados and the inquisitors that the bull must be obeyed although 
it might properly be considered surreptitious, as it asserted that 
Charles had sworn to the fictitious articles inserted by Juan Prat, 
for which the latter deserved the severest punishment. In spite 
of this burst of petulance, however, he practically admitted Prat’s 
innocence by ordering his liberation and, on February 13, 1521, 
the order was carried in triumph by the governor, the Diputados 
and a concourse of nobles and citizens to the Aljaferfa and sol- 
emnly presented to the inquisitors, who asked for copies and, 
with these in their hands, said that they would do their duty 
without swerving from justice and reason. So well satisfied were 
the Aragonese that to show their gratitude they had already, on 
January 18th, ordered the cities and towns to pay all current 
imposts as well as the suspended subsidio within thirty-five days. 
It may be added that finally Cardinal Adrian recognized the 
innocence of Prat in the most formal manner, in a letter of April 
20th to the inquisitors, imposing silence on the fiscal and ordering 
the discharge of Prat and his securities.’ 


1 Argensola, Afiales de Aragon, Lib. 1, cap. liv, Ixxii (Zaragoza, 1630).— 
Llorente, Afiales, IT, 145-247.—Sayas, Afiales de Aragon, cap. ii (Zaragoza, 1666). 


Cuap. V] STRUGGLE IN BARCELONA 283 


Triumph and gratitude were alike misplaced. Cardinal Adrian 
had followed his letter of January 28th with another of the 30th 
to the inquisitors, instructing them that the papal confirmation 
must be construed in accordance with the sacred canons and the 
decrees of the Holy See, so that they could continue to admin- 
ister justice duly and he encouraged them with an ayuda de costa 
or gratuity... They went on imperturbably with their work; not 
only was the Concordia of Saragossa never observed but that of 
Monzon was treated as non-existent and we shall see hereafter 
that, towards the close of the century, the Inquisition coolly as- 
serted that the latter had heen invalidated when Leo X released 
Ferdinand from his oath to observe it and that the former had 
never been confirmed and that there was no trace of either hav- 
ing ever been observed. The Inquisition, in fact, was invulner- 
able and impenetrable. It made its own laws and there was no 
power in the land, save that of the crown, that could force it to 
keep its engagements. 


Meanwhile the obstinacy of the Catalans, which detained the 
impatient Charles in Barcelona throughout the year 1519, secured, 
nominally at least, the formal confirmation by both Charles and 
Adrian, of the Monzon Concordia of 1512 with additions. One of 
these provided that any one who entered the service of the Holy 
Office while liable to a civil or criminal action, should still be held 
to answer before his former judge, and that criminal offences, 
unconnected with the faith, committed by officials should be 
exclusively justiciable in the civil courts. This struck at the root 
of one of the most serious abuses—the immunity with which the 
Inquisition shielded its criminals—and scarcely less important 
to all who had dealings with New Christians was another article 
providing that property acquired in good faith, from one reputed 
to be a Christian, should be exempt from confiscation in case the 


—Dormer, Afiales de Aragon, Lib. 1, cap. xxvi (Zaragoza, 1697).—Archivo hist. 
nacional, Inquisicion de Toledo, Hacienda, Leg. 10 (see also Padre Fidel Fita in 
Boletin, XX XIII, 330).—Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Lib. I de copias, fol. 
125.—Bergenroth, Calendar of Spanish State Papers, Suppl. p. 300.—P. Mart. 
Angler. Epistt. 631, 632, 634.—Bibl. nacional, Seccion de MSS., D, 118, fol. 8, 
104.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 6, fol. 73, 76, 77, 78; Libro 9, fol. 
25, 26; Libro 14, fol. 57, 61; Libro 72, P. 11, fol. 207; Libro 73, fol. 32, 142, 148; 
Libro 74, fol. 170; Libro 921, fol. 72-6, 82, 84, 88, 90. 
1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 73, fol. 144. 


284 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


seller should subsequently be convicted, even though the thirty 
years’ prescription should still exist.’ 

The agreement was reached January 11, 1520, but experience 
of the faithlessness of the Inquisition had made the Catalans 
wary. They were about to grant a servicio to Charles and they 
sought a guarantee by addressing to him a supplication that he 
should make Cardinal Adrian swear to the observance of the 
Concordia of 1512 and the new articles and that he should pro- 
cure within four months from the pope a bull of confirmation, in 
which the Bishops of Lérida and Barcelona should be appointed 
conservators, with full power to enforce the agreement. They 
offered to pay two hundred ducats towards the cost of the bull 
and they demanded that they should retain twenty thousand 
libras of the servicio until the bull should be delivered to the 
Diputados. The same condition was attached to a liberal dona- 
tion of twelve thousand libras which they made to the Inquisition 
—probably a part of the bargain. Meanwhile Charles was to 
give orders that the inquisitors should be bound by the articles 
and, in case of infraction, satisfaction for such violations should be , 
deducted from the twenty thousand libras. In due time, August 
25th, Leo X executed a formal bull of confirmation of the articles 
of 1512 and 1520 and appointed the Bishops of Lérida and Bar- 
celona as conservators.’ 

What was the value of the Concordia thus solemnly agreed to 
and liberally paid for, with its papal confirmation and conserva- 
tors, was speedily seen when, in 1523, the authorities of Perpignan 
became involved in a quarrel with Inquisitor Juan Naverdu over 
the case of the wife of Juan Noguer. They complained of an 
infraction of the Concordia and applied to the Bishop of Lérida 
for its enforcement. He appointed Miguel Roig, a canon of Elna, 
as the executor of his decision, who issued letters ordering the 
inquisitor and his secretary to observe the Concordia, under pain 
of excommunication, and to drop the cases which they were prose- 
cuting. Appeal was also made to Rome and letters were obtained 
from Clement VII. Charles, however, intervened and obtained 


1 Constitucions fetes per la S. C. C. y R. Magestat de Don Carlos elet en Rey 
dels Romans . . . enla primera Cort de Barcelona en lany MDxx. Capitols 
y modificacions y donacio dels bens de Conversos (Barcelona, 1520). Also in 
Pragmaticas y altres Drets de Cathalunya, Tit. viii, 2 3. 

2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Leg. 17, fol. 41, 66; 
Libro 4, fol. 128. 


Cap. V] ABUSES CONTINUE 285 


another brief, January 6, 1524, annulling the previous one and 
transferring the matter to Inquisitor-general Manrique. The 
result was that nearly all the magistrates of Perpignan—the 
consuls and jurados with their lawyers and Miguel Roig—were 
obliged to swear obedience in all things to the Inquisition, were 
exposed to the irredeemable disgrace of appearing as penitents 
at the mass and were subjected to fines from which the Holy Office 
gathered in the comfortable sum of 1115 ducats.! The motto of 
the Inquisition was noli me tangere and it administered a sharp 
lesson to all who might venture, even under papal authority, to 
make it conform to its agreements. 

It was in vain that the sturdy subjects of the crown of Aragon 
struggled and gained concessions, paid for them and fenced 
them around with all the precautions held sacred by public law. 
The inquisitors felt themselves to be above the law and all the 
old abuses continued to flourish as rankly as ever. About this 
time the Cértes of the three kingdoms, by command of Charles, 
addressed to Inquisitor-general Manrique a series of sixteen 
grievances, repeating the old complaints—the extension of 
jurisdiction over usury, blasphemy, bigamy and sodomy; the 
acceptance by the inquisitors of commissions to act as conser- 
vators in secular and ecclesiastical cases and profane matters; 
their arresting people for private quarrels and on trivial charges 
and insufficient evidence, leaving on them and their descendants 
an ineffaceable stain, even though they were discharged with- 
out penance; their multiplication of familiars and concealing 
their names, appointing criminals and protecting them in their 
crimes and finally their overbearing and insulting attitude in 
general. In answer to this the inquisitor-general contented 
himself with asserting that the laws were obeyed and asking for 
specific instances of infraction and the names of the parties— 
secure that no one would dare to come forward and expose 
himself to the vengeance of the tribunal.? Again, in 1528 at the 
Cértes of Monzon, we find a repetition of grievances—the abuse 
of confiscations, the cognizance of usury and other matters dis- 
connected with heresy and general inobservance of the articles 
agreed upon. To the petition that he remedy these and procure 


? Archivo de Simancas, Libro 930, fol. 39. 

? Archivo de Simancas, Patronato Real, Inquisicion, Leg. tnico, fol. 38, 39. 
This paper is not dated but its character and the documents with which it is 
associated indicate that it belongs to this period. 


286 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


from the inquisitor-general an order to his subordinates to con- 
form themselves to the Concordias, Charles returned the equivo- 
cating answer “‘His majesty will see that the inquisitor-general 
orders the observance of that which should be observed, remov- 
ing abuses if there are any.” 

The imperial attitude was not such as to discourage the 
audacity of the inquisitors and, at the Cértes of Monzon in 
September, 1533, the deputies of Aragon presented to Inquisitor- 
general Manrique, who was present, two series of grievances. 
One of these he promptly answered by characterizing some of 
the demands as impertinent, scandalous, and illegal, and others 
as not worthy of reply. The other series was referred to Charles 
and was not answered until December. It commenced by asking 
that the Concordia confirmed by Leo X, in 1516, should be 
observed, to which the reply was that such action should be 
taken as would comport with the service of God and proper 
exercise of the Inquisition. The request that the inquisitors 
confine themselves to matters of faith was met with the assertion 
that they did so, except when under orders from their supe-’ 
riors. To the demand that the dowries of Catholic wives should 
not be confiscated, the dry response was that the laws should 
be observed. In this cavalier spirit the rest of the petition was 
disposed of, and the whole shows how completely the Holy 
Office was emancipated from any subjection to the laws which 
had cost such struggles to obtain and which had been paid for 
so largely.’ 

While Manrique and the Suprema were at Monzon, they were 
called upon to take action with regard to troubles at, Barcelona 
between the inquisitor, Fernando de Loazes and the magistrates 
and Diputados. These had been on foot for some time. A 
letter of Charles from Bologna, February 25, 1533, to Loazes 
assures him of his sympathy and support and, in September, 
the Suprema at Monzon resolved to send a judge thither to 
prosecute and punish the offenders for their enormous delin- 
quencies.” What were the merits of the quarrel do not appear, 
but it was doubtless provoked by the overbearing arrogance of 
Loazes for, at the Cértes of Monzon, the Catalans represented 
to Charles that the pretensions of the inquisitor impeded the 


1 Dormer, Afiales, Lib. 1, cap. xli. 
? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Leg. 17, fol. 47, 48. 
® Ibidem, fol. 61, 64. 


Cuap. V] ABUSES CONTINUE 287 


course of justice in matters involving the regalias or preroga- 
tives of the crown, and asked to have him prosecuted by the 
Bishop of Barcelona. Charles thereupon addressed to Loazes a 
letter, January 16, 1534, forbidding him in future to interfere 
with the royal judges, as no one could claim exemption from the 
royal jurisdiction. At the same time he instructed his lieu- 
tenant for Aragon, Fadrique de Portugal, Archbishop of Sara- 
gossa, to enforce this mandate. It was not long before Loazes 
had the opportunity of manifesting his contempt for these 
expressions of the royal will. One of the consuls holding the 
admiralty court of Barcelona was hearing a case between two 
merchants, Joan Ribas and Gerald Camps: a quarrel ensued 
between them; Ribas with his servant Joan Monseny struck 
Camps in the face and then drawing his sword, threatened the 
consul’s life. This was a scandalous offence to the dignity of 
the crown under whose protection the court was held. By 
order of the Archbishop and royal council the culprits were 
arrested and thrown in prison, but Ribas was a familiar of the 
Inquisition and Loazes presented himself before the arch- 
bishop in full court and claimed him. The letters of Charles V 
were read and his claim was rejected, whereupon, on June 13th, 
he issued a mandate demanding the surrender to him of Ribas and 
forbidding all proceedings against him under pain of excom- 
munication.» What was the termination of this special case 
we have no means of knowing, but Loazes did not suffer by 
reason of his audacity. In 1542 he was made Bishop of Elna, 
whence he passed by successive translations through the sees 
of Lérida, Tortosa and Tarragona, dying at last, full of years 
and honors in 1568 as Archbishop of Valencia. 


It is not worth while at present to pursue these disputes 
which reveal the character of the Inquisition and the resistance 
offered to it by the comparatively free populations subject to 
the crown of Aragon. We shall have ample opportunity here- 
after to note the persistant arrogance of the inquisitors under 
the royal favor, the restlessness of the people and the fruit- 
lessness of their struggle for relief from oppression. The Holy 
Office had become part of the settled policy of the House 


1 Arch. gén. de la C. de A., Fondos del antiguo Consejo de Aragon, Leg. 708.— 
Costitucions fetes . . . en la tercera Cort de Cathalunya en lany 1534 
(Barcelona, 1534). 


288 THE KINGDOMS OF ARAGON [Boox I 


of Austria. The Lutheran revolt had grown to enormous pro- 
portions and no measures seemed too severe that would protect 
the faith from an enemy even more insidious and more danger- 
ous than Judaism. The system grew to be an integral part of 
the national institutions to be uprooted only by the cataclysm 
of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic war. At what cost 
to the people this was effected is seen in the boast, in 1638, of 
a learned official of the Inquisition that in its favor the monarchs 
had succeeded in breaking down the municipal laws and privi- 
leges of their kingdoms, which otherwise would have presented 
insuperable obstacles to the extermination of heresy, and he 
proceeds to enumerate the various restrictions on the arbitrary 
power of the secular courts which the experience of ages had 
framed for the protection of the citizen from oppression, all of 
which had been swept away where the Inquisition was concerned, 
leaving the subject to the discretion of the inquisitor.’ 


1 Parecer del Doctor Martin Real (MSS. of Bodleian Library, Arch. S, 130). . 


BOOK EEL 


RELATIONS WITH THE STATE. 


Oat Jalal cd Oe] ga 9 be 
RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN. 


Wuat gave to the Spanish Inquisition its peculiar and terrible 
efficiency were the completeness of its organization and its 
combination of the mysterious authority of the Church with 
the secular power of the crown. The old Inquisition was purely 
an ecclesiastical institution, empowered, it is true, to call upon 
the State for aid and for the execution of its sentences, but 
throughout Christendom the relations between Church and State 
were too often antagonistic for its commands always to receive 
obedience. In Spain, however, the Inquisition represented not 
only the pope but the king; it practically wielded the two 
swords—the spiritual and the temporal—and the combination 
produced a tyranny, similar in character, but far more minute 
and all-pervading, to that which England suffered during the 
closing years of Henry VIII as Supreme Head of the Church. 

While thus its domination over the people was secure and 
unvarying, its relations with the royal power varied with the 
temperament of the sovereign. At times it was the instrument 
of his will; at others it seemed as though it might almost sup- 
plant the monarchy; it was constantly seeking to extend its 
awful authority over the other departments of State, which 
struggled with varying success to resist its encroachments, while 
successive kings, autocratic in theory, sometimes posed as 
arbitrators, sometimes vainly endeavored to enforce their pacifi- 
catory commands, but more generally yielded to its domi- 
neering spirit. 


When Ferdinand consented to the introduction of the Inquisi- 
tion, it was no part of his policy to permit the foundation of an 
19 (289) 


290 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


institution which should be independent of the royal authority. 
He who sought to forbid in Spain the residence of papal nuncios 
and legates was not likely to welcome the advent of a new 
swarm of papal delegates, whose power over life and property 
would carry unchecked to every corner of the land the influence 
of Rome. Accordingly, as we have seen, he conditioned the 
admission of the Inquisition on the concession of the power of 
appointment and dismissal and he flatly told Sixtus IV that he 
would permit none but appointees of his own to exercise the 
office of inquisitor. As the institution developed and became 
more complex he nominated to the pope the individual to 
whom the papal delegation as inquisitor-general should be 
given and he appointed the members of the Suprema, which 
became known as the Consejo de su Magestad de la Santa General 
Inquisicion. Although the papal commission granted to the 
inquisitor-general faculties of subdelegating his powers and 
appointing and dismissing his subordinates, thus rendering his . 
action indispensable, Ferdinand was careful to assert his right 
to control all appointments and to assume that at least they 
were made with his assent and concurrence. In 1485 the sover- 
eigns had no scruple in appointing at Guadalupe the inquisitors 
who made such havoc among the apostates.. August 8, 1500, 
he writes to the Bishop of Bonavalle that he had determined. to 
commit to him the office of inquisitor in Sardinia, for which the 
commission and subdelegation will be despatched to him by the 
inquisitors-general; he can appoint an assessor and notary, 
but the other officials will be sent from Spain. A letter of the 
same date to the Lieutenant-general of Sardinia announces the 
appointment by the inquisitors-general ‘“‘con nuestra voluntad 
y consentimiento,”’ which was the ordinary formula employed, 
even in such petty cases as when he advised Pedro Badfa, re- 
ceiver of confiscations at Barcelona, March 13, 1501, that they 
had appointed Gregorio Zamarado as portero or apparitor of 
that tribunal, in place of Guillen Donadou and that he is to 
receive the same wages.” Although the participation of the 
inquisitor-general was indispensable, Ferdinand customarily 
assumed his acquiescence as a matter of course; he would make 
the appointment and then ask affectionately for the subdelega- 
tion of power.’ As regards subordinate positions, Torquemada 


1 Pdramo, p. 138. ? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 1. 
3 Ibidem, Libro 3, fol. 21, 27, 28, 353. 


Cuap. I] FERDINAND’S CONTROL 291 


recognized the royal-participation when, in 1485, he instructed 
inquisitors that they could fill vacancies temporarily “until the 
king and I provide for them.” As a rule, it may be said that 
Ferdinand rarely troubled himself about subordinates, but had 
no hesitation in assuming full power when he saw fit, as in 
writing to an inquisitor, March 21, 1499, ‘‘we order you to 
appoint, as by these presents we appoint, Juan de Montiende as 
fiscal in your tribunal.’ 

If he thus controlled appointments he was equally concerned 
in dismissals. We find him writing, April 22, 1498, to an inquis- 
itor of Saragossa, who had discharged an official at Calatayud, 
to reinstate him, as he had done good service with danger to 
his person, and on September 19, 1509, ordering Diego Lépez 
de Cortegano, Inquisitor of Cérdova, to cease his functions at 
once and return to his benefice—though this latter order was 
countersigned by the members of the Suprema.? It would be 
superfluous to adduce additional examples of the control thus 
exercised over the personnel of the Inquisition—a control which 
remained inherent in the crown although, as we shall see, often 
allowed to become dormant. 

In all save spiritual matters, Ferdinand considered the Inqui- 
sition to be merely an instrument to carry out his will, though 
it must be added that this arose from his anxiety that it should 
be perfected in every way for the work in hand, and there is 
absolutely no evidence, in his enormous and confidential cor- 
respondence, that he ever used it for political purposes, even 
in the stormiest times when struggling with unruly nobles. 
Every detail in its organization and working was subject to 
his supervision and, amid all the cares of his tortuous policy, 
extending throughout Western Europe, and the excitement of 
his frequent wars, he devoted the minutest care to its affairs. 
When, in December 1484, Torquemada issued his supplementary 
instructions, he was careful to state that he did so by command 
of the sovereigns, who ordered them to be observed. So -in 
subsequent instructions, issued in 1485, Torquemada orders 
the inquisitors to write to him and to Ferdinand about every- 
thing that should be reported; the king provides their salaries 
and promises them rewards; if there is anything that the king 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 1; Libro 933. 
2 Ibidem, Libro 1; Libro 3, fol. 109. 


292 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


ought to remedy he is to be written to... That, in fact, the king 
was recognized as controlling the Inquisition is seen in all the 
efforts of the Cértes, appealing to him to obtain a modification 
of its rigors, although, as we have seen, the Concordia of 1512 
was held to require the assent of Inquisitor-general Knguera to 
render it binding, with subsequent confirmation by the pope 
and though, in later times, the monarchs found it convenient to 
throw upon the inquisitor-general the responsibility of rejecting 
the demands of their subjects. 

Ferdinand was too self-reliant to deem it necessary to assert 
his power consistently on all occasions. In a subsequent chapter 
we shall see that he submitted to the inconveniences arising 
from an excommunication threatened by Torquemada on re- 
ceivers of confiscations who honored royal drafts in _prefer- 
ence to paying salaries. He had no scruples in making Tor- 
quemada join with him in grants of money or in settling 
competing claims on the debts due to a condemned heretic; he 
sometimes allowed his cédulas to be countersigned by members 
of the Suprema, especially in the later periods; indeed, toward 
the end of his reign, this became so habitual that in letters of 
November 25th and December 10, 1515, he explained that his 
orders were to be obeyed although not so authenticated, because 
none of the members happened to be at hand; he sometimes 
delayed answering applications for instructions until he could 
consult the inquisitor-general, but the mere application to him 
shows that he was regarded as the ultimate arbiter. In fact, 
in a case in which some prisoners named Martinez had appealed 
to him, he replies to the inquisitors, September 30, 1498, and 
March 2, 1499, that the inquisitors-general send instructions 
and it is his will that these should be executed, thus implying 
that his confirmation was requisite.’ 

Whatever participation he might thus allow to the head of the 
Inquisition, when he saw fit he asserted his arbitrary control 
and he by no means deemed it necessary to communicate with 
the tribunals through the inquisitor-general but frequently 
issued his commands directly. May 14, 1499, he writes to an 
Inquisitor to have a certain confiscated property sold at an 
appraised value to Diego de Alcocer, no matter what instructions 


1 See Appendix. All this of course is omitted from the later official compila- 
tions. 
? Archivo de Simancas, Libro 1; Libro 3, fol. 24, 441, 442. 


Cuap. T] FERDINAND’S CONTROL 293 


he may have from the inquisitors-general or what orders to the 
contrary. Even for trifles he took them sharply to task, as 
when, May 17, 1511, he vigorously rebuked one for sending 
Bachiller Vazquez to him on an affair which could have been as 
well settled by letter with much less expense. He was fully 
aware that the power of the Inquisition rested on his support 
and when there was the slightest opposition to his will he had 
no hesitation in saying so, as when, in a letter of July 22, 1486, 
to the inquisitors of Saragossa, he tells them that, although they 
have the name, it is to him and to Isabella that the Holy Office 
owes its efficiency; without the royal authority they can do little 
and, as they recognize his good intentions, they must not inter- 
fere with his orders.’ 

These instances illustrate the minute and watchful care which 
he exercised over all the details of the Holy Office. Nothing 
was too trivial to escape his vigilant attention, and this close 
supervision was continued to the end. The receiver of Valencia 
consults him about a carpenter’s bill of ninety sueldos for repairs 
on the royal palace occupied by the tribunal and Ferdinand 
tells him, May 31, 1515, that he may pay it this time, but it is 
not to be a precedent. On January 18th of the same year he had 
written to the receiver of Jaen that he learns that the audience- 
chamber is ill-furnished and that the vestments for mass are 
lacking or worn out, wherefore he orders that what the inquis- 
itors may purchase shall be paid for.’ 


Ferdinand’s control over the Inquisition rested not only on 
the royal authority, the power of appointment, his own force 
of character and his intense interest in its workings, but also 
on the fact that he held the purse-strings. He had insisted that 
the confiscations should enure to the crown, and he subsequently 
obtained the pecuniary penances. The Inquisition had no 
endowment. One could easily have been provided out of the 
immense sums gathered from the victims during the early years 
of intense activity but, although some slender provision of the 
kind was at times attempted, either the chronic demands of the 
royal treasury or a prudent desire to prevent the independence 
of the institution rendered these investments fragmentary and 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 1; Libro 926, fol. 308.—Arch. gén. 
de la C. de Aragon, Reg. 3684, fol. 103. 
2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 3, fol. 340, 402. 


294 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox Il 


wholly inadequate. Thus the expenses of the tribunals and the 
salaries of the officials were in his hands. Nothing could be 
paid without his authorization and the accounts of the receivers 
of confiscations, who acted as treasurers, were scrutinized with 
rigid care. He regulated the salary of every official and his 
letter-books are full of instructions as to their payment. Besides 
this, it was the Spanish custom to supplement inadequate wages 
with ayudas de costa, or gifts of greater or less amount as the 
whim of the sovereign or the deserts of the individual might call 
for. In time, as we shall see, this became a regular annual 
payment, subject to certain conditions but, under Ferdinand, 
it was still an uncertainty, dependent upon the royal favor and 
the order of the king was requisite in each case, even including 
the Suprema and its officials." The crown thus held the Holy 
Office at its mercy and the recipients of its bounty could not 
resent its control. 

Yet in this perpetual activity of Ferdinand in the affairs of 
the Inquisition it is to be observed that he confined himself to 
temporal matters and abstained from interference with its 
spiritual jurisdiction. In his voluminous correspondence, ex- 
tending, with occasional breaks, over many years, the exceptions 
to this only serve to prove the rule. I have met with but two 
and these fully justified his interference. In 1508 the leading 
barons of Aragon complained that the inquisitors were persecuting 
the Moors and were endeavoring to coerce them to baptism. 
As they had no jurisdiction over infidels, he rebuked them 
severely, telling them that conversion through conviction is 
alone pleasing to God and that no one is to be baptized except 
on voluntary application. So, when some had been converted 
and had been abandoned by their wives and children, he ordered 
the inquisitors to permit the return of the latter and not to 
coerce them to baptism.? The other case was that of Pedro de 
Villacis, receiver of Seville, a man who possessed Ferdinand’s 
fullest confidence. No name occurs more frequently in the 
correspondence and he was entrusted with the management of 
an enormous and most complicated composition, in which the 
New Christians of Seville, Cérdova, Leon, Granada and Jaen 
agreed to pay eighty thousand ducats as an assurance against 
confiscation. While deeply immersed in this the tribunal of 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 3, fol. 346-81. 
2 Tbidem, Libro 926, fol. 76 


Cuap. I] INDEPENDENCE IN MATTERS OF FAITH 295 


Seville commenced to take testimony against him. On hear- 
ing of this Ferdinand was astounded; he expressed indignation 
that such action should be taken without consulting him and 
ordered all the original papers to be sent to him for consideration 
with the Suprema, pending which and future orders nothing 
further was to be done.’ 

This was an extreme case. There are others which prove 
how useless it was to rely upon the royal favor in hopes of inter- 
position. Thus Ferdinand’s vice-chancellor for Aragon was 
Alonso de la Caballerfa, a son of that Bernabos de la Caballeria 
whose Velo de Cristo contra los Judios has been referred to 
above (p. 115). The father’s orthodox zeal did not preserve 
his children from the Inquisition and their names and those 
of their kindred frequently occur in the records. Alonso had 
already passed through its hands without losing his position. 
In December, 1502, his brother Jaime was arrested by the tri- 
bunal of Saragossa, and Alonso ventured to ask Ferdinand’s 
intervention in his favor and also for himself in case he should 
be involved and be subjected to another trial. Ferdinand 
replied, December 23d, expressing regret and the hope that 
all would turn out as he desired; if Alonso’s case comes up again 
he shall be tried by Deza himself who can be relied upon to do 
exact justice. A second application from Alonso brought a 
reply, January 3, 1503, reiterating these assurances and promis- 
ing a speedy trial for his brother, about whom he writes to the 
inquisitors. In effect, a letter to them of the same day alludes, 
among other matters, to Jaime’s case, with the customary injunc- 
tions to conduct it justly so as not to injure the Inquisition and 
assuring them that if they do so they shall not be interfered 
with. How little the appeal to Ferdinand benefited the accused 
is seen in the result that Jaime was penanced in an auto de fe 
of March 25, 1504.’ 

In one respect Ferdinand showed favoritism, but he did so 
in a manner proving that he recognized that the royal power 
could not of itself interfere with the exercise of inquisitorial 
jurisdiction. Notwithstanding his settled aversion to papal 
intervention, he procured a series of curious briefs to spare those 
whom he favored from the disgrace of public reconciliation and 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 3, fol. 423. 
2 Tbidem, Libro 2, fol. 28, 29, 30.—Libro Verde de Aragon (Revista de Espafia, 
CV, 573). 


296 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


penance and their descendants from disabilities. So many of 
his trusted officials were of Jewish lineage that he might well 
seek to shield them and to retain their services. Thus, in briefs 
of February 11, 1484, and January 30, 1485, Innocent VIII 
recites that he is informed that some of those involved in this 
heresy would gladly return to the faith and abjure if they could 
be secretly reconciled, wherefore he confers on the inquisitors 
faculties, in conjunction with episcopal representatives, to 
receive secretly, in the presence of Ferdinand and Isabella, fifty 
persons of this kind to abjuration and reconciliation. A sub- 
sequent brief of May 31, 1486, recites that he learns that the 
sovereigns cannot always be present on these occasions, where- 
fore he grants for fifty more similar power to be exercised in their 
absence but with their consent. Then, July 5, 1486, the same 
is granted for fifty more, even if testimony has been taken 
against them, with the addition of the removal of disabilities 
and the stain of infamy in favor of their children and moreover 
it authorizes the secret exhumation and burning of fifty bodies— 
doubtless the parents of those thus favored. These transactions 
continued, for there are similar letters of November 10, 1487, 
and October 14, 1489, each for fifty persons and fifty bodies, 
to be nominated by the king and queen, and possibly there were 
subsequent ones that have not reached us.* It was doubtless 
under letters of this kind that, on January 10, 1489, Elionor and 
Isabel Badorch were secretly reconciled in the royal palace of 
Barcelona.’ 

These apparently trivial details are of interest as revealing 
the basis on which the Inquisition was established and from 
which it developed. They also throw light on the character of 
Ferdinand, whose restless and incessant activity made itself 
felt in every department of the government, enabling his resolute 
will to break down the forces of feudalism and lay the foundation 
of absolute monarchy for his successors. It would be doing 
him an injustice, however, to dismiss the subject without alluding 


* Raynald. Annal. ann. 1485, n. 81.—Llorente, Afiales, I, 109-11.—Bulario 
de la Orden de Santiago, Lib. I, fol. 29, 33, 91, 101, 102.—Archivio Vaticano, 
Innoc, VIII, Regist. 682, fol. 263, 294.—Fidel Fita, Boletin, XV, 573-8, 587. 

Pastor (Geschichte der Papste, III, 249) erroneously regards this private and 
special reconciliation to be a general decree of Innocent VIII. 

? Carbonell, De Gest. Heret. (Col. de Doc. de Aragon, XXVIII, 18, 29). 

Their father, Pedro Badorch, was sentenced to perpetual prison in the auto of 
August 8, 1488, but was released March 26, 1490. 


Cuap. I] INSISTENCE ON JUSTICE 297 


to his anxiety that the Inquisition should be kept strictly within 
the lines of absolute justice according to the standard of the 
period. Trained in the accepted doctrine of the Church that 
heresy was the greatest of crimes, that the heretic had no rights 
and that it was a service to God to torture him to death, he was 
pitiless and he stimulated the inquisitors to incessant vigilance. 
He was no less eager in gathering in every shred of spoil which 
he could lawfully claim from the confiscation of the victims, 
but, in the distorted ethics of the time, this comported with the 
strictest equity, for it was obedience to the canon law which 
was the expression of the law of God. There can have been no 
hypocrisy in his constant instructions to inquisitors and re- 
ceivers of confiscations to perform their functions with rectitude 
and moderation so that no one should have cause to complain. 
This was his general formula to new appointees and is borne out 
by his instructions in the innumerable special cases where appeal 
was made to him against real or fancied injustice. His absti- 
nence from intrusion into matters of faith limited such appeals 
to financial questions, but these, under the cruel canonical regu- 
lations as to confiscations, were often highly complicated and 
involved the rights of innocent third parties. His decisions in 
such cases are often adverse to himself and reveal an innate 
sense of justice wholly unexpected in a monarch who ranked 
next to Cesar Borgia in the estimation of Machiavelli. An 
instance or two, taken at random out of many, will illustrate 
this phase of his character. July 11, 1486, he writes to. his 
receiver at Saragossa ‘Fifteen years ago, Jaime de Santangel, 
recently burnt, possessed a piece of land in Saragossa and did not 
pay the ground-rent on it to Garcia Martinez. By the fuero of 
Aragon, when such rent is unpaid for four years the land is 
forfeited. You are said to hold the land as part of the con- 
fiscated estate of Santangel and for the above reason it is said 
to belong to Martinez. You are therefore ordered to see what 
is justice and do it to Martinez without delay and if you have 
sold the land, the matter must be put into such shape that 
Martinez may obtain what is due.” In a similar spirit, when 
Gaspar Roig, of Cagliari, deemed himself aggrieved in a trans- 
action arising out of a composition for confiscation, Ferdinand 
writes to the inquisitor of Sardinia, March 11, 1498, “As it is 
our will that no one shall suffer injustice, we refer the case to you, 
charging you at once to hear the parties and do what is just, so 


298 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


that the said Gaspar Roig shall suffer no wrong. . . . You 
will see that the said Gaspar Roig shall not again have to appeal 
to us for default of justice.’” 


It was inevitable that, when this powerful personality was 
withdrawn, the royal control over the Inquisition should dimin- 
ish, especially in view of the inability of Queen Juana to govern 
and the absence of the youthful Charles V. The government of 
Spain practically devolved upon Ximenes, who was Inquisitor- 
general of Castile, while his coadjutor Adrian speedily obtained 
the same post in Aragon. After the arrival of Charles and the 
death of Ximenes, Adrian became chief of the reunited Inqui- 
sition and his influence over Charles in all matters connected 
with it was unbounded. The circumstances therefore were 
peculiarly propitious for the development of its practical inde- 
pendence, although theoretically the supremacy of the crown 
remained unaltered. 

Thus the Suprema, of which we hear little under Ferdinand, 
at once assumed his place in regulating all details. The appoint- 
ing power, even of receivers, who were secular officials, account- 
able only to the royal treasury, passed into its hands. Thus a 
letter of Ximenes, March 11, 1517, to the receiver of Toledo, 
states that there are large amounts of uncollected confiscations, 
wherefore he is directed to select a proper person for an assistant 
and send him to the Suprema to decide as to his fitness, so that 
Ximenes may appoint him with its approval. Still, the nominat- 
ing power remained technically with the crown and, when Charles 
arrived, he was assumed to exercise it as Ferdinand had done, 
however little real volition he may have displayed. In a letter 
of December 11, 1518, concerning the appointment of Andrés 
Sanchez de Torquemada as Inquisitor of Seville, Charles is 
made to say that, being satisfied of Torquemada’s capacity, he 
had charged him to accept the office and that with his assent 
Adrian had appointed him. In another case, where an abbot, 
to whom Adrian had offered the inquisitorship of Toledo, had de- 
clined the office, Charles writes, September 14, 1519, charging 
him to accept it. That Adrian could not act alone was recog- 


* Archivo gén. de la C. de A., Regist. 3684, fol. 100.—Archivo de Simancas, 
Inquisicion, Lib. 1. 

? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 4, fol. 95. 

* Ibidem, Lib. 9, fol. 21, 63. 


Cuap. I] POWER OF APPOINTMENT 299 


nized for, after Charles left Spain, in May, 1520, questions arose 
on the subject and, by letters patent of September 12th, he 
formally empowered Adrian, during his absence, to appoint all 
inquisitors and other officials.’ 

Whether formal delegations of the appointing power were 
subsequently made does not appear, but practically it con- 
tinued with the inquisitor-general, subject to an-uncertain co- 
operation of the Suprema, whose members countersigned the 
commissions, while, with the subordinate positions in the tri- 
bunals, the inquisitors were sometimes consulted, their recom- 
mendations received attention and their remonstrances were 
heard. The various factors are illustrated in a letter of the 
Suprema, August 24, 1544, to the inquisitors of Saragossa who 
had furnished a statement of the qualifications of various 
aspirants for the vacant post of notario del juzgado. In reply 
the Suprema states that its secretary, Hieronimo Zurita, had 
recommended Martin Morales; it had advised with the inquisitor- 
general who had appointed him, but it will bear in mind Barto- 
lomé Malo and will give him something else. 

So far as I am aware, Philip II never interfered with this 
exercise of the appointing power. That he threw the whole 
responsibility on the inquisitor-general and disclaimed any 
concurrence for himself is apparent in a series of instructions, 
May 8, 1595, to the new inquisitor-general, Geronimo Manrique. 
He orders him to observe the utmost care to select fit persons 
for all positions without favoritism and, although it is his duty 
to appoint inquisitors and fiscals, he should communicate his 
selections in advance to the Suprema, as his predecessors had 
always done, because some of the members may be acquainted 
with the parties and prevent errors from being made.* That a 
supervisory power, however, was still recognized in the crown 
is seen in a consulta of June 21, 1600, presented to Philip ITI, 
by Inquisitor-general Guevara, lamenting the unfitness of many 
of the inquisitors. With the habitual tenderness manifested to 
unworthy officials he did not propose to dismiss them but to 


1 Gachard, Correspondence de Charles-Quint avec Adrian VI, p. 236.—Archivo 
de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 73, fol. 105. 

2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Sala 40, Lib. 4, fol. 105, 114, 118, 128, 
132, 138, 158, 177, 220, 223, 224. 

3 MSS. of Library of University of Halle, Yc, Tom. 17.—Archivo de Simancas, 
Lib. 989, fol. 273. 


300 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


make a general shifting by which the best men should be made 
the seniors of the tribunals. To this the king replied with a 
caution about discrediting the Inquisition and a suggestion that 
the parties shifted should be made to ask for the change; he also 
called for their names and the reasons, because he ought to be 
informed about all the individuals.’ 

This indicated a desire to resume the close watchfulness of 
Ferdinand which had long since been forgotten in the turmoil 
and absences of Charles V and the secluded labors of Philip II, 
over despatches and consultas. A bureaucracy was establish- 
ing itself in which the various departments of the government 
were becoming more or less independent of the monarch and 
Philip for the moment appeared disposed to reassert his authority, 
for, in 1603, we are told that he made many appointments of 
inquisitors, fiscals, and even of minor officials.” If so, he was 
too irresolute, feeble, and fitful to carry out a definite line of 
policy for when, in 1608, he issued the customary instructions 
to a new inquisitor, Sandoval y Rédjas, he merely repeated the 
injunctions of 1595, with the addition that transfers should also 
be communicated to the Suprema.* Yet in one case he even 
exceeded Ferdinand by intervening in a case of faith. When 
he went to Toledo with his court to witness the auto de fe of 
May 10, 1615, he asked to see the sentence of Juan Cote, 
penanced for Lutheranism, and made some changes in the 
meritos, or retital of offences, altered the imprisonment to per- 
petual and irremissible and added two hundred lashes. The 
tribunal consulted the Suprema, which approved the changes on 
the supposition that the inquisitor-general had participated in 
them, but the day after the auto Cote was informed that the 
Suprema had mercifully remitted the scourging.‘ 

Philip IV, in 1626, on the death of Inquisitor-general Pacheco, 
asked the Suprema to suggest the instructions to be given to 
the new incumbent and was advised to repeat those of 1608. 
He virtually admitted the power of appointment to be vested 
in that office when, in the same year, the Cértes of Barbastro 
petitioned that in Aragon all the officials of the tribunals should 
be Aragonese and he replied that he would use his authority 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 29, fol. 10. 
? Archivo de Alcalé, Estado, Legajo 3137. 

* MSS. of Library of Univ. of Halle, ubi sup. 

4 Ibidem, Ye, 20, Tom. 9. 


Cuap. I] POWER OF APPOINTMENT 301 


with the inquisitor-general that a certain portion of them should 
be so.* Notwithstanding his habitual subservience to the In- 
quisition, however, he reasserted his prerogative, in 1640, by 
appointing the Archdeacon of Vich as Inquisitor of Barcelona 
and he followed this, in 1641 and 1642, by several others, even 
descending to the secretaryship of Lima which he gave to 
Domingo de Aroche. This brought on a struggle, ending in a 
compromise in which the inquisitor-general was sacrificed to 
the Suprema. Papal intervention was deemed to be necessary 
and a brief was procured in March, 1643, under which Philip, 
by decree of July 2, ordered that in future, in all vacancies 
of positions of inquisitor and fiscal, the inquisitor-general and 
Suprema should submit to him three names from which to make 
selection. The Suprema thus recognized was satisfied, but Soto- 
mayor, the inquisitor-general, was obstinate. In June, Philip 
had called for his resignation, which he offered after some hesi- 
tation and expressed his feelings in a protest presenting a sorry 
picture of the condition of the Holy Office. The present disor- 
ders, he said, had arisen from the multiplication of offices, whereby 
their character had depreciated and, as the revenues were 
insufficient for their support, they were led to improper devices. 
The Suprema had been powerless for, on various occasions, the 
king had rewarded services in other fields by the gifts of these 
offices, when no consideration could be given to character, 
and he had also been forced to make appointments by com- 
mands as imperative as those of the king—an evident allusion 
to Olivares.* 

Sotomayor’s successor, Arce y Reynoso, conformed himself 
to these new rules and, until his death in 1665, he submitted all 
appointments and transfers to the king. Philip survived him 
but three months and, under the regency which followed and the 
reign of the imbecile Carlos II, the inquisitor-general resumed 
the power of appointment without consultation. So completely 
was the royal supervision forgotten that the instructions to 
Inquisitor-general Rocaberti, in 1695, repeat the old formula 


1 MSS. of Library of Univ. of Halle, Yc, Tom. 17.—Fueros en las Cértes de 
Barbastro y Calatayud de 1626, p. 16 (Zaragoza, 1627). 

? Archivo dé Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 55, fol. 217. 

3 MSS. of Library of Univ. of Halle, Yc, T. 17.—Archivo de Simancas, Inqui- 
sicion, Libro 33, fol. 846-7, 851; Libro 35, fol. 509, 567.—-Cartas de Jesuitas (Mem. 
hist. espafiol, XVII, 35). 


302 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


of 1608.* In this, the injunction of consulting the Suprema was 
displeasing to the Holy See, after its intervention in the affair 
of Froilan Diaz (of which more hereafter) had caused it to take 
sides in the quarrel over the respective powers of the inquisitor- 
general and the Suprema. As the commission of the former 
was a papal grant, it held that no restriction could be placed 
on him and, when Vidal Marin was appointed, Clement XI sent 
to him August 8, 1705, urgent instructions to uphold the dignity 
of his office which had exclusive authority in the premises.” 

The command was too agreeable not to be obeyed and, from 
this time, the unrestricted power of appointment was in the 
hands of the inquisitor-general. About 1765, a writer tells us 
that all salaried offices were filled by him alone. If the king 
wished to gratify some one with a position he would signify his 
desire to the inquisitor-general that such person should be borne 
in mind at the first vacancy and the royal wish was respected, 
in the absence of special objection. If such there were it was 
reported to the king and his decision was awaited.* With the 
tendency to assert the prerogative, under Carlos III, this was 
called in question, in 1775, when the royal Camara scrutinized 
the brief commissioning Felipe Bertran as inquisitor-general, 
but the protest was merely formal; the appointing power re- 
mained undisturbed; it survived the Revolution and continued 
until the Inquisition was suppressed.‘ 


Of vastly greater importance was the power of selecting and 
virtually dismissing the inquisitor-general and this the crown 
never lost. In fact this was essential to its dignity, if not to its 
safety. Had the appointment rested with the pope, either 
the Inquisition would of necessity have been reduced to insig- 
nificance or the kingdom would have become a dependency 
of the curia. Had the Suprema possessed the power of presenting 
a nominee to the pope, the Inquisition would have become an 
independent body rivalling and perhaps in time superseding 
the monarchy. Yet, after the death of Ferdinand, Cardinal 


1 Archivo de Alcala, Estado, Leg. 3137; Hacienda, Legajo 544? (Libro 10).— 
Bibliotheca nacional, Seccion de MSS., G, 61, fol. 203. 

? Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Libro V, fol. 137. 

8 Archivo de Alcalé, Estado, Legajos 2848, 3137.—Archivo hist. nacional, 
Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 16, n. 6. 

‘ Archivo de Simancas, Gracia y Justicia, Leg. 629; Inquisicion, Libros 435, 
559.—Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 17, n. 4. 


Cuap. I] THE INQ UISITOR-GENERALSHIP 303 


Adrian, when elected to the papacy, seemed to imagine that 
Ferdinand’s privilege of nomination had been merely personal 
and that it had reverted to him. February 19, 1522, he wrote 
to Charles that a successor must be provided; after much thought 
he had pitched on the Dominican General but had not determined 
to make the appointment without first learning Charles’s wishes. 
If the Dominican was not satisfactory, Charles could name some 
one else, for which purpose he suggested three other prelates. 
Charles replied from Brussels, March 29th, assuming the appoint- 
ment to be in his hands, but ordered his representative Lachaulx 
to confer with Adrian. He was in no haste to reach a decision 
and it was not until July 13, 1523, that he instructed his am- 
bassador, the Duke of Sessa, to ask the commission for Alfonso 
Manrique, Bishop of Cérdova, on whom he had conferred the 
post of inquisitor-general and the archbishopric of Seville. 
The records afford no indication of any question subsequently 
arising as to the power of the crown to select the inquisitor- 
general. It was never, however, officially recognized by the 
popes, whose commissions to the successive nominees bore the 
form of a motu proprio—the spontaneous act of the Holy See— 
by which, without reference to any request from the sovereign, 
the recipient was created inquisitor-general of the Spanish 
dominions and was invested with all the faculties and powers 
requisite for the functions of his office? No objection seems 
to have been taken to this until Carlos III exercised a jealous 
care over the assertion and maintenance of the regalias against 
the assumptions of the curia. The first appointment he had 
occasion to make was that of Felipe Bertran, Bishop of Sala- 
manea, after the death of Inquisitor-general Bonifaz. Decem- 
ber 27, 1774, was despatched the application to the papacy for 
the commission, carefully framed to avoid attributing to the 
latter any share in the selection or appointment and merely 
asking for a delegation of faculties, accompanied with instruc- 
tions to the ambassador Floridablanca to procure for Bertran 
a dispensation from residence at his see during his term of office. 
Clement XIV had died, September 22, 1774, and the intrigues 
arising from the suppression of the Jesuits delayed the election 
of Pius VI until February 15, 1775, but on February 27th the 


1 Gachard, Correspondence de Charles-Quint avec Adrian VI, pp. 38, 41, 54, 
66, 75, 95, 193. 
2 Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Libro I de copias, fol. 35, 39, etc. 


304 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


commission and dispensation were signed. March 25th, Carlos 
sent the commission to the royal Camara for examination before 
its delivery to Bertran and the Camara reported, April 24th, that 
its fiscal pronounced it similar to that granted to Bonifaz in 1755, 
but that it did not express as it should the royal nomination and 
had the form of a motu proprio; he also objected to its granting 
the power of appointment and further that some of the faculties 
included infringed on the royal and episcopal jurisdictions, 
while the clauses on censorship conflicted with the royal decrees. 
Under these reserves the brief was ordered to be delivered to 
Bertran; whether or not a protest was made to the curia does 
not appear, but if it was it was ineffective for the same formula 
was used in the commission issued to Inquisitor-general Agustin 
Rubin de Cevallos, February 17, 1784.’ 


It may be assumed as a matter of course that the king had 
no power to dismiss an inquisitor-general who held his com- 
mission at the pleasure of the pope, but the sovereign had usu- 
ally abundant means of enforcing a resignation. Whether that 
of Alfonso Sudrez de Fuentelsaz, in 1504, was voluntary or 
coerced is not known, but the case of Cardinal Manrique, the 
successor of Adrian, shows that if an inquisitor-general was not 
forced to resign he could be virtually shelved. Manrique, as 
Bishop of Badajoz, after Isabella’s death, had so actively sup- 
ported the claims of Philip I that Ferdinand ordered his arrest; he 
fled to Flanders, where he entered Charles’s service and returned 
with him to Spain, obtaining the see of Cérdova and ultimately 
the archbishopric of Seville.?, Perhaps he incurred the ill-will of 
the Empress Isabella soon after his appointment, for we find 
him complaining, January 23, 1524, to Charles that when in 
Valencia she had ordered the disarmament of the familiars and 
the arrest of Micer Artes, a salaried official of the Inquisition, 
violations of its privileges for which he asked a remedy.? In 
1529, he gave more serious cause of offence. When Charles 
sailed, July 28th, to Italy for his coronation, he placed under 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Gracia y Justicia, Legajo 629, fol. 1-14.—See Appendix. 

The cost of the briefs to Bertran was 250 ducats for the commission and 50 for 
the dispensation. That to Bonifaz had been 245; there seems to have been a 
progressive advance for the briefs to Cevallos cost him 370.—Ibidem. 

? Llorente, Afiales, II, 263. 

$ Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Sala 40, Libro 4, fol. 98. 


Cuap. I] THE INQUISITOR-GENERALSHIP 305 


charge of the empress Dofia Luisa de Acufia, heiress of the 
Count of Valencia, until her marriage should be determined. 
There were three suitors—Manrique’s cousin the Count of 
Trevino, heir apparent of the Duke of Najera, the Marquis of 
Astorga and the Marquis of Mayorga. The empress placed her 
ward in the convent of San Domingo el Real of Toledo, where 
Manrique abused his authority by introducing his cousin; an 
altar had been prepared in advance and the marriage was cele- 
brated on the spot. The empress, justly incensed, ordered him 
from the court to his see until the emperor should return and 
turned a deaf ear to the representations by the Suprema, Decem- 
ber 12th, of the interference with the holy work of the Inquisition 
and the discredit cast upon it. It was probably to this that 
may be referred the delay in his elevation to the cardinalate, 
announced March 22, 1531, after being kept in petto since Decem- 
ber 19, 1529. On Charles’s return, in 1533, he was allowed to take 
his place again, but he fell into disgrace once more in 1534, when 
he was sent back to his see where he died at an advanced age 
in 1538. Still, this was not equivalent to dismissal; he con- 
tinued to exercise his functions and his signature is appended 
to documents of the Inquisition at least until 1537.1. Yet while 
thus dealing with the inquisitor-general the crown could exercise 
no control over the tribunals. The empress was interested in 
the case of Fray Francisco Ortiz, arrested April 6, 1529, by the 
tribunal of Toledo, and she twice requested the expediting of his 
trial for which, October 27, 1530, she alleged reasons of state, 
but the tribunal was deaf to her wishes as well as to those of 
Clement VII who interposed July 1, 1531, and the sentence was 
not rendered until April 17, 1532. 

There was no occasion for royal interference with Inquisitors- 
general Tavera, Loaysa or Valdés. If the latter was forced to 
resign, in 1566, it was not by order of Philip II but of Pius V for 
his part, as we shall see hereafter, in the prosecution of Car- 


1 Sandoval, Hist. de Carlos V, Lib. xv, 4 30.—Ciacconii Vitze Pontiff. ITI, 519. 
—Zufiiga, Afiales de Sevilla, Lib. xiv, afios 1529, 1534.—Archivo de Simancas, 
Inquisicion, Libro 77, fol. 228; Libro 939, fol. 62, 115, 134; Patronato Real, 
Inquisicion, Leg. tinico, fol. 38, 39. 

Llorente (Hist. crft., cap. xv, art. ii, n. 5) attributes his second disgrace to 
Charles’s anger at the prosecution of his favorite preacher Alonso Virués, which 
he assumed that Manrique ought to have prevented. 

2 Ed. Boéhmer, Francisca Herndndez und Francisco Ortiz, pp. 140, 173.— 
Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Libro III, fol. 133. 

20 


306 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


ranza, Archbishop of Toledo. So if Espinosa, in 1572, died in 
consequence of a reproof from Philip II, it was not for official 
misconduct and merely shows the depth of servility attainable 
by the courtiers of the period. The reign of the feeble Philip III 
however afforded several instances that the royal will sufficed 
to create a vacancy. He had scarce mounted on the throne as a 
youth of twenty, on the death of Philip II, September 138, 1598, 
before he sought to get rid of Inquisitor-general Portocarrero, 
who had, it is said, spoken lightly of him, or had incurred the 
ill-will of the favorite, the Duke of Lerma. To effect this, a 
bull was procured from Clement VIII requiring episcopal resi- 
dence; Portocarrero was Bishop of Cuenca, a see reputed to be 
worth forty thousand ducats a year, but he preferred to abandon 
this and made fruitless efforts at Rome to be permitted to do 
so. He left Madrid in September, 1599, for Cuenca and died 
of grief within a twelve-month, refusing to make a will because, 
as he said, he had nothing to leave but debts that would take 
two years’ revenue of his see to pay.’ His successor, Cardinal 
Fernando Nifio de Guevara fared no better. He was in Rome 
at the time of his appointment and did not take possession of 
his office until December 23, 1599, but already in May, 1600, 
there were rumors that he was to be superseded by Sandoval 
y Rojas, Archbishop of Toledo. Yet, in 1601, he was made 
Archbishop of Seville and he sought to purchase Philip’s favor 
by a gift of forty thousand ducats and nearly all his plate. This 
was unavailing and, in January, 1602, he was ordered to reside in 
his see, when he dutifully handed in his resignation.2 Juan de 
Zuniga, who succeeded, had a clause in his commission per- 
mitting him to resign the administration of his see in the hands 
of the pope, but the precaution was superfluous for he died, 
December 20, 1602, after only six weeks’ enjoyment of the 
office, for which he had sacrificed thirty thousand ducats a year 
from his see. He was old and feeble and his death was attrib- 
uted to his coming in winter from a warm climate to the rigors 
of Valladolid, then the residence of the court.° 


1 Cabrera, Relaciones, pp. 17, 33, 44, 579 (Madrid, 1857).—Hinojosa, Des- 
pachos de la Diplomacia Pontificia, I, 403 (Madrid, 1896).—Bibl. nacional, 
Seccion de MSS., Ii, 16. 

? Cabrera, Relaciones, pp. 50, 56, 67, 112, 129.—Bibl. nacional, wbi sup.— 
Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Libro IV, fol. 137. 

* Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, loc. cit—Cabrera, Relaciones, pp. 152, 154, 
159, 162. 


Cuap. I] THE INQUISITOR-GENERALSHIP 307 


The question of non-residence was happily solved, for a time 
at least, by selecting as the next incumbent Juan Bautista de 
Azevedo, Bishop of Valladolid, the seat of the court. He was 
a person of so little consequence that the appointment aroused 
general surprise until it was recalled that he had been a secretary 
of Lerma. When the court removed to Madrid, in 1606, he was 
obliged to choose between the two dignities and his resignation 
of the bishopric was facilitated by granting him a pension of 
twelve thousand ducats on the treasury of the Indies, besides 
which, as Patriarch of the Indies, he had a salary of eight thous- 
and.* His death soon followed, in 1608, when Sandoval y Rojas, 
the uncle of Lerma, obtained the position without sacrificing 
his primatial see of Toledo, a dispensation for non-residence 
being doubtless easily obtained by such a personage. 

Sandoval was succeeded, in 1419, by Fray Luis de Aliaga, a 
Dominican who had been Lerma’s confessor. In 1608 Lerma 
transferred him to the king, over whom his influence steadily 
increased, although his doubtful reputation is inferable from the 
popular attribution to him of the spurious continuation of Don 
Quixote, published in 1614 under the name of Avellaneda—a 
work of which the buffoonery and indecency are most unclerical.? 
Though he owed his fortune to Lerma, he joined, in 1618, in 
causing his patron’s downfall in favor of Lerma’s nephew, the 
Duke of Uceda, and during the rest of Philip’s reign Uceda 
and Aliaga virtually ruled and misgoverned the land, filling the 
offices with their creatures, selling justice and intensifying the 
financial disorders which were bringing Spain to its ruin. When 
Philip IV succeeded to the throne, March 31, 1621, under tutelage 
to his favorite Olivares, their first business was to dismiss all 
who had been in power under the late king. The secular officials 
were easily disposed of, but the papal commission of the inquisi- 
tor-general rendered him independent of the king; he did not 
manifest the accommodating disposition of Portocarrero and 
Guevara and, as he was not a bishop, he could not be ordered 
to his see. It illustrates the anomalous position of the Inquisition, 
as part of an absolute government, that for some weeks the 
question of his removal was the subject of repeated juntas and 


1 Cabrera, Relaciones, pp. 168, 310, 344, 573.—Bibl. nacional, Seccion de MSS., 
Tecig? 

* Cabrera, pp. 252-4.—Ticknor’s Spanish Literature, IT, 142.—Another Domin- 
ican, Fray Juan Blanco de Paz, is also credited with the paternity. 


308 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox IL 


consultations, but finally, April 23d, Philip wrote, ordering him to 
leave the court within twenty-four hours, for the Dominican Con- 
vent of Huete, where his superior would give him further instruc- 
tions. He obeyed, but he refused the bishopric of Zamora and 
the continuance of his ecclesiastical revenues as the price of 
his resignation. The only method left was to obtain from 
Gregory XV the withdrawal of his delegated powers by repre- 
senting his unworthiness, his guilty complicity with Uceda and 
Osuna and Philip III’s reproach to him on his death-bed for 
misguiding his soul to perdition. Gregory listened favorably 
and Aliaga seems to have recognized the untenableness of his. 
position and to have resigned, although no evidence of it exists. 
All we know is that Andrés Pacheco, Bishop of Cuenca, was: 
appointed as his successor in February, 1622, and took posses- 
sion of the office in April. Even after this Alaga was an object 
of apprehension. In June, 1623, he came to Hortaleza, which. 
was within a league or two of Madrid. Immediately the court. 
was in a flutter; the king held earnest consultations; his propin- 
quity was regarded as dangerous and he could not be allowed 
to return, as he had asked, to his native Aragon, which was. 
in a chronically inflammable condition, while in Valencia his 
brother was archbishop; nor could he be allowed to leave the 
kingdom, possessing as he did so intimate a knowledge of state: 
secrets. There were messages and active correspondence and 
finally he was allowed to settle in Guadalajara with ample: 
means, where his remaining three years of life passed in ob- 
security. Llorente tells us that proceedings were commenced 
against him for propositions savoring of Lutheranism and. 
materialism, which were discontinued after his death, a device. 
doubtless adopted to keep him in retirement.’ 

Andrés Pacheco, who succeeded him in 1622, prudently re- 
signed his see of Cuenca and, in spite of his audacious enforcement. 
of inquisitorial claims, was allowed to hold the office until his. 
death, April 7, 1626.2 There was no haste in filling the vacancy, 
for it was not until August 6th that Olivares replied to the king’s. 
order to report in writing the best persons to fill the office. He 


* Archivo de Simancas, Gracia y Justicia, Legajo 621, fol, 11—Archivo de 
Alcala, Estado, Leg. 2843.—Cabrera, Relaciones, p. 588.—Cespedes y Meneses, 
Historia de Felipe Quarto, Lib. 11, cap. 3.—Pellegrini, Relazioni di Ambasciatori_ 
Lucchesi, p. 62 (Lucca, 1903).—Ilorente, Hist. crit. Cap. xxxvu, Art. 1, n. 18.. 

? Bibl nacional, Seccion de MSS., Ii, 16. 


Cuap. I] THE INQUISITOR-GENERALSHIP 309 


named four, covertly indicating his preference for Cardinal 
Zapata, who had resigned the archbishopric of Burgos in 1605 
and at the time was governor of that of Toledo. Philip followed 
the suggestion by an endorsement on the paper, which was a 
singularly informal appointment, remarking at the same time 
that the choice should not be made public until his successor 
at Toledo was selected.t His resignation of the office, in 1632, 
is commonly attributed to a request from the king, but this is 
by no means certain. He was more than eighty years of age 
and for some time had been talking of resigning; already in 
1630 the Suprema alludes in a consulta to the publicity of his 
intention of relieving himself of the charge. Possibly at the 
end some gentle pressure may have been used, but when, 
September 6, 1632, the commission of his successor arrived, 
his parting with the king was in terms of mutual respect and 
good feeling. His retirement was softened by continuing to 
him his full salary and perquisites, amounting to 1,353,625 mrs. 
(3620 ducats) which, as the Suprema never had enough revenue 
for its desires, was not cordially welcomed.’ 

His successor, the Dominican Fray Antonio de Sotomayor, 
was Archbishop of Damascus in partibus and confessor of the 
king. He was already in his seventy-seventh year and, when 
he had held his office for eleven years, his infirmities and in- 
capacity became more evident to others than to himself. Early 
in 1643 the fall of Olivares deprived him of support, his oppo- 
sition to the king in the matter of appointments still further 
weakened his position and in June he was requested to resign 
in view of his advanced age and to preserve his health. He 
was much disturbed and consulted friends, who advised him to 
obey, but he still held on, saying that they might await his death. 
Greater pressure was applied to which he yielded. June 20th 
he made a formal notarial attestation of his desire to be relieved 
on account of his great age and the next day he sent in an un- 
gracious resignation, followed, on the 24th by one addressed to 
the pope. His successor, Diego de Arce y Reynoso, Bishop of 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Gracia y Justicia, Leg. 621, fol. 57. “ Pareceme para 
este oficio mas 4 proposito el Cardenal Capata, y asi le hago m4 de él, pero no se 
ha de publicar asta ser quien sera aproposito para el cargo del Gobernador del 
Arzobispado de Toledo, por que es mi voluntad que salgan con los officios en una 
dia.” 

? Bibl. nacional, Seccion de MSS., X, 157.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, 
Libro 31, fol. 34, 637. 


310 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN  _— [Book II 


Plasencia, was already on the spot, exercising some of the func- 
tions, but Urban VIII hesitated to confirm the, change and 
required explanations. It was not until September 18th that 
the commission of Arce y Reynoso was expedited and it only 
reached Madrid November 7th. Sotomayor was “‘jubilated”’ 
with half his salary of nine thousand ducats, which he enjoyed 
for five years longer.’ 

Arce y Reynoso, as we shall see, when embroiled with Rome 
in the prosecution of Villanueva, Marquis of Villalva, was obliged 
to resign his see of Plasencia, December 2, 1652, in order 
to retain his inquisitor-generalship. He continued in office 
until his death, June 20, 1665, followed by that of Philip, Sep- 
tember 16th. During this interval, Philip gave the appointment 
to Pascual of Aragon, son of the Duke of Cardona and serving 
at the time as Viceroy of Naples. He promptly sailed for Spain 
and, though he is said to have resigned without acting, there are 
documents of October and November, 1665, which show that 
he performed the functions of the office.? He obtained the see 
of Toledo March 7, 1666, and desired to retain the inquisitor- 
generalship, but the Queen-regent, Maria Ana of Austria, com- 
pelled him to resign, in order to fill the place with her confessor 
and favorite the German Jesuit, Johann Everardt Nithard.’ 

Nithard, in 1668, boasted that he had had charge of the queen’s 
conscience for twenty-four years, during which she had kept 
him constantly with her. He had thus moulded her character 
from youth and, as she was weak and obstinate, he had rendered 
himself indispensable. Her selection of him as inquisitor-general 
provoked lively opposition, which even reverence for royalty 
could not repress; protests were presented, leading to prolonged 
and heated discussion, but resistance was in vain.t He was 
appointed October 15, 1666, and speedily became the ruler of 
the kingdom which he misgoverned. The general dissatisfac- 
tion thus aroused was stimulated by the jealousy of the frailes, 


* Cartas de Jesuitas (Mem. hist. espafiol, T. XVII, pp. 110, 116, 122, 143, 172, 
235, 255).—Pellicer, Avisos (Valladares, Semanario ertidito, XX XIII, 104).— 
Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro, 126, fol. 2. (See Appendix). 

? Cartas del Consejo, Tom. xi (MSS. of American Philosophical Society). 

* Candamo, Controversias en la menor edad de Carlos II (Semanario ertidito, 
TViy): 

* There is a voluminous collection of documents on the subject in the Simancas 
archives, Inquisicion, Libro 33, fol. 963-1100. 


Cuap, I] THE INQUISITOR-GENERALSHIP 311 


who had been accustomed to see Dominicans as royal con- 
fessors and whose hatred of the Company of Jesus was exacer- 
bated by his combination of that position with the inquisitor- 
generalship. He was accused of filling the Holy Office with 
Jesuit calijicadores, under whose advice he managed it, and with 
accumulating for himself pensions amounting to sixty thousand 
ducats a year. Spain at the time had a pinchbeck hero in the 
person of the second Don Juan of Austria, son of Philip IV by 
a woman known as la Calderona; he stood high in popular 
esteem, for he had the reputation of suppressing the Neapolitan 
revolt of 1648 and of ending the Catalan rebellion by the capture 
of Barcelona in 1652. Between him and Nithard there inevi- 
tably arose hostility which ripened into the bitterest hatred. 
To get him out of the country, he was given command of an 
expedition about to sail for Flanders; he went to Corufia but 
refused to sail; he was ordered to retire to Consuegra, whither 
a troop of horse was sent to arrest him, but he had fled to Cata- 
lonia, leaving a letter addressed to the queen in which he said 
that the execrable wickedness of Nithard had forced him to 
provide for his safety; his refusal to sail had been caused by his 
desire to remove from her side that wild beast, so unworthy of 
his sacred office; he did not propose to kill him for he did not 
wish to plunge into perdition a soul in such evil state, but he 
would devote himself to relieving the kingdom of this basilisk, 
confident that the queen would recognize the service thus rendered 
to the king. 

This letter and a similar one of November 13th were widely 
circulated and inflamed the popular detestation of Nithard. 
Don Juan stood forward as the champion of the people against 
the hated foreigner and continued to issue inflammatory ad- 
dresses. Letters came pouring into the court, from the cities 
represented in the Cértes, praying the queen to accede to his 
demands but, though her councillors wavered, she stood firm. 
December 3d she wrote to him to return to Consuegra or to come 
near to Madrid, where negotiations could be carried on. While 
taking advantage of this he avoided the trap by writing that, 
as his life was endangered, her envoy, the Duke of Osuna, had 
furnished him with a guard of three companies of horse—about 
250 men in all. With this escort he started from Barcelona by 
way of Saragossa. It was in vain that orders were sent from 
the court to insult him on the road. Everywhere his journey 


312 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


was like a royal progress. Nobles and peoples gathered to applaud 
him and, in Saragossa even the tribunal of the Inquisition bore 
a part, while the students carried around the effigy of a Jesuit 
and burnt it before the Jesuit house, forcing the rector to witness 
it from the window. 

As he drew near to Madrid with his handful of men, Nithard 
called on the nobles of his party to assemble with their armed 
retainers, but the Council of Regency prohibited this. Don Juan 
was in no haste; on February 9th he reached Junquera, some ten 
leagues from Madrid and, on the 22d, he was at Torrejon de Ardoz, 
about five leagues distant. Imminent danger was felt that if 
he advanced the populace would rise and murder the ministers 
to whom they attributed their sufferings, and all idea of resist- 
ance was abandoned. Nithard induced the papal nuncio to see 
Don Juan, February 24th, and ask further time for negotiation 
but at 9 p.m. the nuncio returned with word that Nithard must 
leave Spain at once. The Royal Council sat until 10 p.m. and 
reached the same conclusion. The next day the city was in 
an uproar; people carried their valuables to the convents for 
safe keeping and a mob assembled around the palace, where the 
Junto de Gobierno drew up a decree that Nithard must depart 
within three hours. It bore that he had supplicated permission 
to leave and in granting it the queen, to exprees her satisfaction 
with his services, appointed him ambassador to Germany or to 
Rome as he might elect, with retention of all his offices and 
salaries. The queen signed this and the Archbishop of Toledo 
and the Count of Pefaranda were deputed to carry it to 
Nithard, who received it without a trace of emotion and placed 
himself at their disposal. It was arranged that they should 
call for him at 6 p.m. The archbishop and the Duke of Maqueda 
came with two coaches and Nithard entered, carrying with him 
nothing but his breviary. Thrice, in the streets, the howling 
mob threatened an attack, but were deterred by the sight of a 
cross with which the archbishop had prudently provided him- 
self. They drove him to Fuencarral, about two leagues from 
the city and left him at the house of the cura. The next day 
he went to San Agustin, about ten leagues distant, where he 
lingered for awhile in the vain hope of recall. 

Don Juan fell back to Guadalajara, where terms were agreed 
upon, the principal articles being that Nithard should imme- 
diately resign all his offices and never return to Spain and that 


Cuap. I] THE INQUISITOR-GENERALSHIP $13 


Diego de Valladares, Don Juan’s special enemy, should have 
nothing to do in any matter affecting him. Nithard accordingly 
went to Rome, but he had no commission to show and no instruc- 
tions. He reported this to the Council of State, which told 
him to urge the definition by the Holy See of the Immaculate 
Conception. The queen endeavored by a subterfuge to obtain 
for him a cardinal’s hat, which had been promised to Spain, but 
failed. He still hoped for a return to his honors, stimulated by 
the correspondence of his confidential agent, the Jesuit Salinas, 
but a letter warning him not to resign the inquisitor-generalship, 
for things were tending towards his return, with a lodging in the 
queen’s palace, chanced to fall into the hands of the nuncio, 
who placed it where it would do the most good. The result 
was a peremptory order for him to resign in favor of Valladares, 
who had been nominated as his successor. When this was 
handed to him by San Roman, the Spanish ambassador, he is 
said to have fainted and not to have recovered his senses for an 
hour. The coveted cardinal’s hat was bestowed on Portocarrero, 
Dean of Toledo, and when the news of this reached the queen it 
threw her into a tertian fever. The Jesuit General Oliva, seeing 
Nithard thus stripped of his offices and offended at his arrogance, 
ordered him to leave Rome and he retired to a convent, but he 
was amply provided with funds and, for some years at least, 
he was carried on the books of the Suprema and received his 
salary regularly. Moreover, in 1672, the queen procured from 
Clement X what Clement IX had persistently refused and 
Nithard was created Archbishop of Edessa and cardinal.’ 
Valladares had received his appointment September 15, 1669. 
It was not until 1677 that he resigned his see of Plasencia and 
he held the inquisitor-generalship until his death, January 29, 
1695. He was succeeded by Juan Thomas de Rocaberti, Arch- 
bishop of Valencia, for whom Innocent XII, at the request of 
Carlos IJ, granted a dispensation from residence, conditioned 
on his making proper provision for the spiritual and temporal 
care of his see.? He died June 13, 1699, and his successor, Alfonso 


1 Candamo, loc. cit., pp. 4-239)—Memorias histéricas de la Monarquia de 
Espafia (Semanario ertidito, XIV, 19).—MSS. of the Royal Library of Munich, 
Cod. Ital. 191, fol. 710.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Leg. 1476, fol. 3. 

? Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Libro V, fol. 118. This continued to be the 
practice, requiring a renewal of the brief every three years until 1774, when, as 
we have seen, Felipe Beltran obtained a dispensation good for his tenure of office, 
a favor repeated to his successors. 


314 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


Fernandez de Aguilar, Cardinal of Cérdova, followed him Sep- 
tember 19th, the very day that his commission arrived, after 
a brief illness and not without grave suspicions of poison.» The 
choice then fell on Balthasar de Mendoza y Sandoval, Bishop of 
Segovia, who became involved, as we shall see, in a deadly 
quarrel with his colleagues of the Suprema over the case of Fray 
Froilan Diaz. In the confusion of the concluding months of the 
disastrous reign of Carlos II, who died November 1, 1700, 
Mendoza made the mistake of embracing the Austrian side; his 
arbitrary action, in the case of Froilan Diaz, served as a sufficient 
excuse for his removal and Philip V, apparently in 1703, ordered 
him to return to his see. He is generally said to have resigned 
in 1705 but, in the papal commission, March 24, 1705, for his 
successor Vidal Marin, Clement XI states that he has seen fit to 
relieve Mendoza of the office because his presence is necessary 
at Segovia.? Vidal Marin served till his death in 1709 and so 
did his successor Riva-Herrera, Archbishop of Saragossa, who, 
however, enjoyed his dignity for little more than a year. 

Philip V had brought to Spain the Gallicanism and the prin- 
ciples of high royal prerogative which were incompatible with 
the pretensions of the curia and the quasi-independence of the 
Inquisition. With the Bourbons there opens a new era in the 
relations between the crown and the Holy Office. Yet in his 
first open trial of strength, Philip’s fatal vacillation, under the 
varying influences of his counsellors, confessors and wives, left 
him with a dubious victory. In 1711 he selected as inquisitor- 
general Cardinal Giudice, Archbishop of Monreal in Sicily, a 
Neapolitan of much ambition and little scruple. The recognition 
of the Archduke Charles as King of Spain by Clement XI, in 
1709, had caused relations to be broken off between Madrid and 
Rome. Philip dismissed the nuncio, closed the tribunal of the 
nunciatura and forbade the transmission of money to Rome. 
There was talk in the curia of reviving the medieval methods 
of reducing disobedient monarchs to submission and Philip, to 
prepare for the struggle, ordered, December 12, 1713, the Council 
of Castile to draw up a statement of the regalfas which would 
justify resistance to the demands of the curia and to the juris- 
diction exercised by nuncios. It was a quarrel which had been 


1 Proceso contra Fray Froilan Dfaz, pp. 143-44. 
? Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Libro V, fol. 136. 


Cuap. I] THE INQUISITOR-GENERALSHIP 315 


in progress for a century and a half, now breaking out fiercely 
and then smothered, but none the less bitter. The Council 
entrusted the task to its fiscal, Melchor Rafael de Macanaz, a 
hard-headed lawyer, fully imbued with convictions of royal 
prerogative, whose report was, in general and in detail, thoroughly 
subversive of Ultramontanism and consequently most distaste- 
ful to the curia.* When it was presented to the council, December 
19th, Don Luis Curiel and some others prevented a vote and 
asked for copies that they might consider the matter maturely. 
Copies were given to each member, consideration was postponed 
and, on February 14, 1714, Molines, the ambassador at Rome, 
reported that copies had been sent there by Curiel, Giudice 
and Belluga, Bishop of Murcia. Although it was a secret state 
paper, the curia issued a decree condemning it and, coupled 
with it, an old work, Barclay’s reply to Bellarmine and a French 
defence of the royal prerogative by Le Vayer, attributed to 
President Denis Talon. Such a decree could not be published 
in Spain without previous submission to the Royal Council, but 
Giudice was relied upon to evade this. He was nothing loath, 
for he had an old quarrel with Macanaz, who had prevented his 
obtaining the archbishopric of Toledo, his enmity being so 
marked that at one time Philip, to separate them, had sent 
Macanaz to France with the title of ambassador extraordinary, 
but without functions. At the moment Giudice was ambassador 
to France and the decree was sent to him; he declined to act 
unless assured of the protection of the courts of Rome and 
Vienna and, on receiving pledges of this, he signed it, July 30th 
as inquisitor-general and sent it to the Suprema for publication. 
Four of the members promptly signed it and had it published 
at high mass in the churches on August 15th. This created an 
immense sensation and exaggerated accounts were circulated 
of the errors and heresies contained in the unknown legal argu- 
ment which Macanaz had prepared in the strict line of his duty. 

When Philip was informed the next day of this audacious 
proceeding he called into consultation his confessor Robinet 
and three other theologians, who submitted on the 17th an 
opinion in writing that the Suprema should be required to 
suspend the edict and that Giudice should be dismissed and 
banished. The Suprema obeyed, excusing itself on the pretext 


1 Printed by Llorente, Coleccion Diplomadtica, p. 27. 


°316 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


that it had supposed, as a matter of course, that Giudice had sub- 
mitted the edict to the king. He was not satisfied with this and 
dismissed three of them, but they refused to surrender their 
places. Then he summoned a meeting of the Council of Castile, 
pointing out that, if such things were permitted, the kingdom 
would be reduced to vassalage under the Dataria and other 
tribunals of the curia; the Council was not to separate until 
every member had recorded his opinion as to the measures to be 
taken. Seven of them voted for dismissing and banishing 
‘Giudice, while four showed themselves favorable to the Inquisi- 
tion. Meanwhile, on the 17th, Philip had despatched a courier 
to Paris summoning Giudice to return and informing Louis XIV 
of the affair. The latter, recognizing that the decree was an 
assault on the French as well as the Spanish regalias, refused to 
‘Giudice a farewell audience and sent his confessor Le Tellier 
to tell him that, were he not certain that Philip would punish 
him condignly, he would do so himself. When Giudice reached 
Bayonne he was met by an order not to enter Spain until the 
edict should be revoked. He replied submissively, enclosing 
his resignation, whereupon Philip commanded him to return to 
his archbishopric—a command which he did not obey. Felipe 
Antonio Gil de Taboada was appointed inquisitor-general and, on 
February 28, 1715, his commission was despatched from Rome; 
probably the Suprema interposed difficulties for he never served; 
he obtained the post of Governor of the Council of Castile, to be 
rewarded subsequently with the archbishopric of Seville.* 
Meanwhile there was a court revolution. Maria Luisa of Savoy, 


* Belando, Historia civil de Espafia desde 1700 hasta 1733, P. rv, cap. ix, xv 
(Madrid, 1744). See also Macanaz’s Commentary on Feyjoo’s Teatro Critico 
(Semanario ertidito, VIII, 27-9). 

This volume of Belando’s work was examined by the Council of Castile, before 
a license to print was issued, and was subjected toa second examination by order 
of Philip, before he would permit its dedication to himself and his queen. This, 
and the secret documents which it contains, show that its account of the Giudice 
affair may be regarded as authentic. This did not save the book from the Inquisi- 
tion which condemned it in 1744 and, when the author asked to be heard in its 
defence and offered to make any changes required, he was thrown into prison and 
then relegated to a convent with orders to write no more books.—Llorente, Hist. 
crit., Cap. xxv, Art. 1, n. 12. 

The Marquis of San Felipe gives an account of the affair much less favorable 
to Macanaz and the royal prerogative——Mémoires pour servir A l’Histoire 
d’Espagne sous le Regne de Philippe V, III, 120 sqgq. (Amsterdam, 1756). 


‘Cuap. I] THE INQUISITOR-GENERALSHIP Sli 


Philip’s wife, died February 11, 1714. The Princesse des Ursins, 
who had accompanied her to Spain and had become the most 
considerable personage in the kingdom, desired to find a new 
bride whom she could control. Giulio Alberoni, an adroit 
Italian adventurer, was then serving as the envoy of the Duke 
of Parma and persuaded her that Elisabeth Farnese, the daughter 
of his patron, would be subservient to her, and the match was 
arranged. December 11, 1714, Elisabeth reached Pampeluna 
and found Alberoni there ready to instruct her as to her course 
and his teaching bore speedy fruit. Des Ursins had also hastened 
to meet the new queen and was at Idiaguez, not far distant, 
where she received from the imperious young woman an order 
to quit Spain. Alberoni, who was in league with Giudice and 
hated Macanaz, painted him to Elisabeth in the darkest colors 
and his ruin was resolved upon. 

He had been pursuing his duty as Fiscal-general of the Council 
of Castile; in July, 1714, he had occasion to make another report 
on the notorious evils of the Religious Orders, pointing out the 
necessity of their reform and asserting that the pope is not the 
master of ecclesiastical property and spiritual profits. Some 
months later he was called upon to draw up a complete reform 
of the Inquisition, suggested doubtless by the pending conflict, 
for which an occasion was found in an insolent invasion of the 
royal rights by the tribunal of Lima. The Council of Indies 
complained that the latter had removed from the administra- 
tion of certain properties indebted to the royal treasury the 
person appointed by the Chamber of Accounts, on the plea that 
the owner was also a debtor to the Inquisition. Philip V there- 
upon ordered Macanaz, in conjunction with D. Martin de Miraval, 
fiscal of the Council of Indies, to make a report covering all the 
points on which the Holy Office should be reformed. The two 
fiscals presented their report November 14, 1714, exhaustively 
reviewing the invasions of the royal jurisdiction which, as we 
shall see hereafter, were constant and audacious, and their 
recommendations were framed with a view of rendering the 
Inquisition an instrument for executing the royal will, to the 
subversion of the jealously-guarded principle that laymen should 
be wholly excluded from spiritual jurisdiction.* 


1 Puigblanch, La Inquisicion sin Mascara, pp. 412-15 (Cadiz, 1811). 
Puigblanch says that he possessed a copy of this consulta signed by Macanaz 
at Montauban in 1720. So far as I am aware it has never been printed. 


318 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


In the reaction wrought by Elisabeth and Alberoni, Macanaz 
was necessarily sacrificed. Philip, notoriously uxorious, speedily 
fell under the domination of his strong-minded bride and 
Alberoni became the all-powerful minister. Giudice, who had 
been loitering on the borders, was recalled and, on March 28, 
1715, Philip abased himself by signing a most humiliating 
paper, evidently drawn up by Giudice, reinstating the latter 
and apologizing for his acts on the ground of having been 
misled by evil counsel.* Alberoni and Giudice, however, were 
too ambitious and too unprincipled to remain friends. Their 
intrigues clashed in Rome, the one to obtain a cardinal’s hat, 
the other to advance his nephew. Alberoni had the ear of the 
queen and speedily undermined his rival. Giudice was also 
tutor of the young prince Luis; on July 15, 1716, he was deprived 
of the post and ordered to leave the palace and, on the 25th, he 
was forbidden to enter it. He fell into complete disfavor and 
shortly left Spain for Rome, where he placed the imperial arms 
over his door. His resignation must have followed speedily for, 
on January 23, 1717, the tribunal of Barcelona acknowledges 
receipt of an announcement from the Suprema that the pope 
has at last acceded to the reiterated requests of Cardinal 
Giudice to be allowed to resign and has appointed in his place 
D. Joseph de Molines, as published in a royal decree of Janu- 
ary 9th.  Alberoni obtained the coveted cardinalate but his 
triumph was transient. He replaced the king’s confessor, 
Father Robinet with another Jesuit, Father Daubenton, who 
soon intrigued against him so successfully and so secretly that 
the first intimation of his fall was a royal order, December 5, 
1719, to leave Madrid.within eight days and Spain in three 
weeks. He vainly sought an audience of Philip and was forced 
to obey.* 

Although the episode of Giudice is thus closed, the fate of 
Macanaz is too illustrative of inquisitorial methods and of royal 
weakness to be passed over without brief mention. He had in- 
curred the undying hatred of the Inquisition simply in discharge 


1 MSS. of Royal Library of Copenhagen, No. 210 fol_—I have printed this 
document in “Chapters from the Religious History of Spain,” p. 483. 

2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisition, Sala 39, Leg. 4, fol. 57. 

$ Alfonso Professione, Il Ministero in Spagna del Card. Giulio Alberoni, p. 244 
(Torino, 1897). 


Cuap. I] THE INQUISITOR-GENERALSHIP 319 


of his duty as an adviser of the crown, with perhaps an excess 
of zeal for his master and an intemperate patriotism that strove 
to restore its lost glories to Spain. It was impossible to continue 
him in his high function while recalling Giudice and, as a decent 
cover for banishment, he was allowed, in March, 1715, to seek 
the waters of Bagnéres for his health, when he departed on an 
exile that lasted for thirty-three years to be followed by an 
imprisonment of twelve. Giudice promptly commenced a prose- 
cution for heresy, sufficient proof of which, according to the 
standards of the Holy Office, was afforded by his official papers. 
As he dared not return, his trial in absentia resulted, as such 
trials were wont to do, in conviction, and he seems to have been 
sentenced to perpetual exile with confiscation of all his property, 
including even five hundred doubloons which the king was send- 
ing to him at Pau through a banker of Saragossa. All his papers 
and correspondence in the hands of his friends were seized and 
his brother, a Dominican fraile, whom the king had placed in 
the Suprema, was arrested in the hope of obtaining incriminating 
evidence." 

Thenceforth he led a life of wandering exile, so peculiar that 
it is explicable only by the character of Philip. He was in con- 
stant correspondence with high state officials and was frequently 
entrusted with important negotiations. Sometimes he was 
under salary, but it was irregularly paid and for the most part 
he had to struggle with poverty. When the Infanta Maria Ana 
Vitoria was sent back to Spain from France, in 1725, he was 
commissioned to attend her to the border and from there he 
went as plenipotentiary to the Congress of Cambray, with the 
comforting assurance that the king was endeavoring to put an 
end to the affair of the Inquisition—an effort apparently frus- 
trated by the influence of Pére Daubenton.? It was possibly 
with a view to overcome this fatal enmity that he occupied 
his leisure, between 1734 and 1736, in composing a defence of the 
Inquisition from the attacks of Dr. Dellon and the Abbé Du 
Bos. In this he had nothing but praise for its kindliness towards 
its prisoners, its scrupulous care to avoid injustice, the rectitude 
of its procedure and the benignity of its punishments. Beyond 


1 Macanaz, Regalfas de los Reyes de Aragon, Introd. pp. xix-xxv (Madrid, 
1879). 
? Regalias de los Reyes de Aragon, Introd. p. xxviii. 


320 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox IL 


these assertions, the defence reduces itself to showing that, from. 
the time when the Church acquired the power to persecute, it. 
has persecuted heretics to the death and that the heretics in 
their turn have been persecutors—propositions readily proved. 
from his wide and various stores of learning and sufficient to satisfy 
a believer in the semper et ubique et ab omnibus." Ten years 
later, when Fernando VI ascended the throne in 1746, Macanaz 
addressed him a memorial on the measures requisite to relieve 
the misery of Spain and in this he superfluously urged the 
maintenance of the Inquisition in all its lustre and authority.” 
In spite of all this it was unrelenting and his entreaties to be: 
allowed to return were fruitless. 

In 1747 he was sent to the Congress of Breda where he mis- 
managed the negotiations, deceived, it is said, by Lord Sand- 
wich. Relieved and ordered, in 1748, to present himself to the 
Viceroy of Navarre at Pampeluna, after some delay he was 
carried to Corufa and immured incomunicado in a casemate 
of the castle of San Antonio, a prison known as a place of rigorous: 
confinement. Even the authorities there compassionated him 
and, at their intercession, he was removed to an easier prison 
and permitted the use of books and writing materials. Here, 
during a further captivity of twelve years, the indomitable old 
man occupied himself with voluminous commentaries on the 
Teatro critico of Padre Feyjoo and the E'spafia sagrada of Florez, 
with many other writings and memorials to the king. It was 
not until the death of the latter, in 1760, that Elisabeth of Parma, 
the regent and the cause of his misfortunes, liberated him with 
orders to proceed directly to Murcia. At Leganes he was greeted 
by his wife and daughter, with whom he went to Hellin, his 
birth-place, where he died on the following November 2d, in his 
ninety-first year. 

There is no record of any further exercise of royal control over 
inquisitors-general until, in 1761, Clement XIII saw fit to con- 
demn the Catechism of Mesengui for its alleged Jansenism in 
denying the authority of popes over kings. The debate over it 


1 Defensa critica de la Inquisicion, I, 7-10, 18, 23. 

The work was not printed in the lifetime of Macanaz but was issued by Valla- 
dares in 1788. 

? Valladares, Semanario ertidito, VIII, 221. 

* Ibidem, VII, 4, 127, 138; VIII, 168.—Regalfas de los Reyes de Aragon, 
Introd. pp. xliii-iv. 


Cuap. I] THE INQUISITOR-GENERALSHIP 321 


in Rome had attracted the attention of all Europe and the pro- 
hibition of the book was regarded as a general challenge to 
monarchs. Carlos III had watched the discussion with much 
interest, especially as the work was used in the instruction of his 
son. He expressed his intention of not permitting the publica- 
tion of the prohibition but, by a juggle between the nuncio and. 
the inquisitor-general, Manuel Quintano Bonifaz, an edict of 
condemnation was hastily drawn up of which copies were given 

to the royal confessor on the night of August 7th. They did not: 
reach the king at San Ildefonso until the morning of the Sth,, 
who at once despatched a messenger to Bonifaz ordering him: 
to suspend the edict and recall any copies that might have been: 
sent out. Bonifaz replied that copies had already been delivered 
to all the churches in Madrid and forwarded to nearly all the 
tribunals; to suppress it would cause great scandal, injurious to: 
the Holy Office, wherefore he deeply deplored that he could not 
have the pleasure of obeying the royal mandate. Carlos was. 
incensed but contented himself with ordering Bonifaz to absent 
himself from the court; he obeyed and, in about three weeks, 
made an humble apology, protesting that he would forfeit his: 
life rather than fail in the respect due to the king. Carlos then 
permitted him to return and resume his functions and, when 
the Suprema expressed its gratitude, he significantly warned it. 
to remember the lesson... He took warning himself and, on 
January 18, 1762, he issued a pragmatica systematizing the 
examination of all papal letters before issuing the royal exequatur 
which permitted their publication.’ 

Carlos III had no further occasion to exercise his prerogatives 
but it was otherwise with Carlos IV. His first appointee, Manuel 
Abad y la Sierra, Bishop of Astorga, who assumed office May 
11, 1793, had but a short term, for he was requested to resign in 
the following year. His successor, Francisco Antonio de Loren- 
zana, Archbishop of Toledo, who accepted the post September 
12, 1794, was not much more fortunate, although his enforced 
resignation, in 1797, was decently concealed under a mission 
to convey to Pius VI the offer of a refuge in Majorca. He was 
followed by Ramon José de Arce y Reynoso, Archbishop of 
Saragossa, who resigned March 22, 1808, four days after the- 


1 Ferrer del Rio, Historia de Carlos III, I, 384 sqq. 
? Novisima Recop. II, ii, 9. 
21 


322 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox Il 


abdication of Carlos IV in the “‘tumult of lackeys” at Aranjuez, 
probably to escape his share of the popular odium directed 
against the favorite Godoy.* During the short-lived revival of 
the Inquisition under the Restoration, its dependence on the 
royal power was too great for differences to arise that would 
provoke assertions of the prerogative. 


The relations of the crown with the Suprema were originally 
the same as with the other royal councils. The king appointed 
and removed at will although, as the members came to exercise 
judicial functions, it was necessary for the inquisitor-general 
to delegate to them the papal faculties which alone conferred on 
them jurisdiction over heresy. Ferdinand exercised the power 
of appointment and removal and, as his orders were requisite 
for the receivers of confiscations to pay their salaries, it is scarce 
likely that anyone had the hardihood to raise a question.” We 
have seen how he forced the members to accept as a colleague 
Aguirre though he was a layman, how Ximenes when governor 
of Castile removed him and Adrian reinstated him. The earliest 
formula of commission that I have met is of the date of 1546; it 
bears that it is granted by the inquisitor-general, who constitutes 
the appointee a member and invests him with the necessary 
faculties, and it is moreover countersigned by the other members.® 
In this there is no allusion to any nomination by the king, al- 
though the appointment lay in his hands. In 1573 the Venitian 
envoy Leonardo Donato so states, adding that the popes felt 
very bitterly the fact that they had no participation in it; they 
had repeatedly tried to secure the membership of some one 
dependent upon them, such as the nuncio, but Philip would not 
permit it; the council did nothing without his consent, tacit or 
expressed.* At some period, not definitely ascertainable, the 
custom arose of the inquisitor-general presenting three names 
from among which the king made selection. At first the number 
of members was uncertain, but it came to be fixed at five, in 
addition to the inquisitor-general. To these Philip II added 
two from the Council of Castile; as these were sometimes laymen, 


’ Llorente, Hist. crit. Cap. xtrv, Art. 1, n. 42, 43—Modesto de Lafuente 
Historia general de Espafia, XXII, 97, 125. 

? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 9, fol. 144, 192. 

3 Ibidem, Sala 40, Lib. 4, fol. 153. 

* Relazioni Venete, Serie I, Tom. VI, p. 370. 


Cuap. I] THE SUPREMA 323 


he finally had scruples of conscience and, in his instructions to 
Manrique de Lara, in 1595, he tells him that when there are 
fitting ecclesiastics in the Council of Castile they are to be pro- 
posed to him for selection; if there are not, it is to be considered 
whether a papal brief should be procured to enable them to act 
in matters of faith. These adventitious members came to be 
known as consejeros de la tarde, as they attended only twice a 
week and in the afternoon sessions of the body, where its secular 
business was disposed of, and thus they took no share in matters 
of faith. Their salary was one-third that of the others. 

The royal authority was emphatically asserted when, in 1614, 
Philip III ordered that a supernumerary place should be made 
for his confessor Fray Aliaga, with precedence over his colleagues 
and a salary of fifteen hundred ducats; also that when the royal 
confessor was a Dominican he should always have this place 
and, when he was not, that it should be given to a Dominican. 
The Suprema accepted Aliaga but demurred to the rest, when 
Lerma peremptorily ordered it to be entered on the records; 
there were murmurings followed by submission. After the 
accession of Philip IV, he ordered the Council to make out a 
commission for his confessor, the Dominican Sotomayor, to 
which there was ineffectual opposition.” The rule held good. 
Soon after the Inquisition was reorganized under the Restora- 
tion, Fernando VII, July 10, 1815, appointed his confessor, 
Cristébal de Bencomo, a member to serve without salary for 
the time but with the reversion of the first vacancy and all the 
honors due to his predecessors; he had the seat next to the dean 
and when the latter died, February 16, 1816, he took his position 
and salary.’ Philip V ordered that a seat should always be 
occupied by a Jesuit; this of course lapsed with the expulsion of 
the Jesuits in 1767, after which Carlos III, in 1778, provided 
that the Religious Orders should have a representative by 
turns.‘ 

The royal power of appointment was not uncontested and 
gave rise to frequent debates. Philip IV sometimes yielded and 


1 Archivo de Alcald, Estado, Leg. 3137.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, 
Libro 939, fol. 271.—Pdramo, p. 150. 

? Bibl. nacional, Seccion de MSS., D, 118, fol. 183.—Cabrera, Relaciones, p. 
560. 

3 Archivo de Simancas, Registro de Genealogias, 916, fol. 66. 

* Discurso sobre el Origen, etc., de la Inquisicion, p. 70 (Valladolid, 1803). 


324 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


sometimes persisted; occasionally the question was complicated 
and papal intervention was hinted at.’ A decisive struggle came 
in 1640, in which the Suprema chose its ground discreetly. It 
suited Olivares to appoint Antonio de Aragon, a youthful cleric 
and the second son of the Duke of Cardona. Anticipating 
resistance, Philip announced the nomination imperiously; Don 
Antonio must be admitted the next day as he was about to start 
for Barcelona and any representations against it could be made 
subsequently. The Suprema replied that the inquisitor-general 
could not make the appointment and if he did so it would be 
invalid; Don Antonio was less than thirty years old; the canons 
require an inquisitor to be forty, although Paul III had reduced, 
for Spain, the age to thirty; members of the Suprema were 
inquisitors and it was only as such that they sat in judgement 
without appeal in cases of faith. To this Philip rejoined that 
Olivares would report the efforts he had made to quiet his con- 
science in view of the great public good to result from the ap- 
pointment, wherefore he expected that possession would be 
given to Don Antonio without delay. Matters went so far that 
the Duchess of Cardona wrote to her son to abandon the effort 
but the royal command prevailed; he obtained the position and 
in the following year he was made a member of the Council of 
State; he was already a member of the Council of Military Orders 
and the whole affair gives us a glimpse of how Olivares governed 
Spain.” Having thus asserted his prerogative, Philip, in 1642 
and the early months of 1643, made four appointments without 
consultation. The remonstrances of the Suprema must have been 
energetic for Philip yielded and, in a decree of June 26 (or July 2), 
1643, he agreed that the old custom of submitting three names 
should be renewed, with the innovation that the Suprema should 
unite in making the recommendations. Against this the inquisi- 
tor-general protested, but in vain. It was probably to make 
an offset to these royal nominees that, November 10, 1643, the 
inquisitor-general and Suprema asked that their fiscal should 


* Archivo de Alcala, Estado, Leg. 3137,—Archivo de Simancas, Gracia y 
Justicia, Leg. 621, fol. 58-60.— Bibl. nacional, Seccion de MSS., G, 61, fol. 209-10; 
Pp, 28, 2 13.—MSS. of Bodleian Library, Arch. 8, 130.—Archivo de Simancas, 
Inquisicion, Libro 21, fol. 60. 

? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 21, fol. 256.—Bibl. nacional, ubi 
sup.—Archivo de Alcald, ubi sup.—Parets, Sucesos de Catalufia (Memorial hist. 
espafiol, X XI, Append. p. 398).—Cartas de Jesuitas (Mem. hist. espan. XVI, 81, 
205). 


Cuapr. I] THE SUPREMA O20 


have a vote, which Philip refused.1. The rule continued of sub- 
mitting three names for selection, but the participation of the 
Suprema in this seems to have been dropped. The royal control, 
moreover asserted itself in the case of Froilan Diaz when, by 
decree of November 3, 1704, Philip V reinstated three members, 
Antonio Zambrana, Juan Bautista Arzeamendi and Juan 
Miguélez, who had been arbitrarily ejected and jubilado by 
Inquisitor-general Mendoza, ordering moreover that they should 
receive all arrears of salary.’ 


While thus the crown continued to exercise the right of select- 
ing the heads of the Inquisition, its practical control was greatly 
weakened by one or two changes which established themselves. 
Of these perhaps the most important was the claim of the 
Suprema to interpose itself between the king and the tribunals, 
so that no royal commands to them should be obeyed unless 
they should pass through it, thus rendering the inquisitors 
subject to itself alone and not to the sovereign. In a government 
theoretically absolute this was substituting bureaucracy for 
autocracy and, when the example was followed, though at a 
considerable distance, by some of the other royal councils, it 
at times produced deadlocks which threatened to paralyze all 
governmental action. 

We have seen that, towards the end of Ferdinand’s reign, his 
letters to the tribunals were sometimes countersigned by mem- 
bers of the Suprema, but that this was not essential to their 
validity and, when there was an attempt to establish such a claim, 
he was prompt to vindicate his authority. A royal cédula of 
October 25, 1512, gave certain instructions as to the manumission 
of baptized children of slaves whose owners had suffered con- 
fiscation. There was no question of faith involved, but when, 
in 1514, Pedro de Trigueros applied to the inquisitors of Seville 
to be set free under it, they refused on the ground that it had 
not been signed by the Suprema. He appealed to Ferdinand 
who promptly ordered the inquisitors to obey it; if they find 
Pedro’s story to be true they are to give him a certificate of 
freedom and meanwhile are to protect him from his master, who 


1 Archivo de Alcal4, wbi swo.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 33, 
fol. 846; Libro 35, fol. 509.—MSS. of Library of Univ. of Halle, Yc, T. 17. 

2 Archivo de Alcald4, Hacienda, Legajo 544? (Libro 10).—Bibl. nacional, Seccion 
de MSS. G, 61, fol. 22.—Proceso criminal contra Fray Froylan Diaz, p. 222. 


326 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


was seeking to send him to the Canaries for sale." The claim which 
Ferdinand thus peremptorily rejected was persistently main- 
tained during the period of confusion which followed his death. 
Whether it received positive assent from Charles is more than 
doubtful, although the Suprema so asserts in a letter of July 27, 
1528, ordering inquisitors to examine whether a certain royal 
cédula had been signed by its members, for the kings had ordered 
that none should be executed in matters connected with the 
Inquisition unless thus authenticated—thus basing the claim 
on the royal will and not on any inherent right of the Holy 
Office So complete was the autonomy thus established for 
the organization that a carta acordada or circular of instructions, 
May 12, 1562, tells the tribunals that, if an inquiry from the king 
comes to them through any other council, they are to reply 
that if the king desires the information it will be furnished to 
him through the inquisitor-general or the Suprema.’ 

The far-reaching importance of this principle can scarce 
be exaggerated. One of its results will be seen when we come 
to consider the complaints and demands of the Cortes and find 
that fweros directed against inquisitorial aggressions in purely 
civil matters, when agreed to by the king were invalid without 
confirmation by the inquisitor-general. A single instance here 
will suffice to show the working of this. In 1599 various demands 
of the Cértes of Barcelona were conceded by Philip III. One 
regulated the number of familiars, which Philip promised that 
he would induce the inquisitor-general to put into effect, within 
two months if possible. Another provided that all officials, 
save inquisitors, should be Catalans; he agreed to charge the 
inquisitor-general and Suprema to observe this and he would 
get it confirmed by the pope. Another was that, in the secular 
business of the tribunal, the opinion of the Catalan assessor 
should govern, because he would be familiar with the local law; 
this he accepted and promised, in so far as it concerned the 
inquisitor-general and Suprema, to charge them to give such 
orders to the tribunal. Another was that commissioners and 
familiars should not be “‘religious,’’ to which his reply was the 
same. Another required the inquisitor-general to appoint a 
resident of Barcelona to hear appeals in civil cases below five 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 3, fol. 384. 
* Tbidem, Libro 939, fol. 136. 
3 Ibidem, Libro 978, fol. 36. 


Cuap. I] THE SUPREMA 327 


hundred libras; this he said was Just and he would charge 
the inquisitor-general to do so. After this, in fulfilment of his 
plighted word, he addressed the inquisitor-general in terms 
almost supplicatory “I charge you greatly that for your part 
you condescend and facilitate that what they have supplicated 
may be put in execution, in conformity with what I have con- 
ceded and decreed in each of these articles, which will give me 
particular contentment.’ Not the slightest attention was paid 
to this request and, on May 6, 16038, Philip repeated it “‘As until 
now it is understood that not a single thing contained in it has 
been put in, execution and, as I desire that it be enforced, I 
ask and charge you to condescend to it and help and facilitate it 
with the earnestness that I confidently look for.’* This second 
appeal was as fruitless as the first and the Catalans gained noth- 
ing. Itis true that, in 1632, the Barcelona tribunal, in a memo- 
rial to Philip IV, asserted that Philip III had only assented to. 
these articles to get rid of the Catalans and that he wrote privately 
to the pope asking him not to confirm them.’ 

This case may have been mere jugglery and collusion, but in 
general it by no means followed that royal decrees sent to the. 
Suprema for transmission were forwarded. If it objected, it 
would respond by a consulta arguing their impropriety or ille- 
gality, and this would, if necessary, be repeated three or four 
times at long intervals until, perhaps, the matter was forgotten 
or dropped or some compromise was reached. The privilege 
that all instructions must be transmitted through the Suprema 
was therefore one of no little importance and it was insisted 
upon tenaciously. There was a convenient phrase invented 
which we shall often meet—obedecer y no cumplir—to obey 
but not to execute, which was very serviceable on these occasions. 
In 1610 the Suprema argued away a cédula of Philip III as 
invalid because it had been despatched through the Council of 
State and the king was repeatedly told to his face that the laws 
required his cédulas to be countersigned by the Suprema in 
order to secure their execution. This was done to Philip IV, 
in 1634, when he intervened in a quarrel and, in 1681 to Carlos II 
when there were difficulties threatened with foreign nations 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Libro 29, fol. 59. . 

It is observable that the kings always addressed the Inquisition “por ruego y 
encargo” and never “por mandamiento.” 

? Ibidem, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Legajo 17, fol. 9. 


328 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


arising from abuses committed in examining importations in 
search of forbidden books.’ As the questions calling for royal 
interposition as arule affected only the wide secular and not the 
spiritual jurisdiction of the Inquisition, this created conditions 
unendurable in any well-organized government. 


Another change which conduced greatly to the independence 
of the Inquisition was the control which it acquired over its 
finances. We have seen that, under Ferdinand, the confiscations 
and pecuniary penances belonged to the crown and that the 
salaries and expenses were paid by his orders. The finances of 
the Inquisition will be discussed hereafter and meanwhile it 
suffices to say that, after his death and the exuberant liberality 
of Charles to his Flemish favorites during his first residence in 
Spain, the diminishing receipts from these sources caused them 
to be virtually assigned to defraying the expenses of the Inquisi- 
tion and they were no longer regarded as a source of supply to 
the royal treasury. Still, the money belonged to the crown and 
the Inquisition enjoyed it only under the authority and by 
virtue of the bounty of the sovereign. 

The growth of control over income and of virtual financial 
independence was gradual and irregular. Even Ferdinand, 
in his watchful care over his receivers of confiscations, felt the 
need of some central auditor and it seemed natural that he 
should be an official of the Suprema. Accordingly as early as 
1509 we find a “‘contador general” in that position. In 1517 there 
are two officers, a contador and a receiver-general and, in 1520, 
the two are merged into one.” When, in 1513, Bishop Mercader 
was made inquisitor-general of Aragon he desired a statement 
from all receivers of their receipts and payments and of the 
property remaining in their hands and Ferdinand ordered them 
to comply, alluding to it as usual on the entrance of a new inquis- 
itor-general.* This inevitably ripened into the transfer to that 
official of the control over receivers which Ferdinand had exer- 
cised, so that in place of being royal officials they became virtually 
officers of the Inquisition and eventually were designated as 
treasurers. By 1544 we find the Suprema to be the final court 


* Archivo de Simancas, Libro 20, fol. 340; Libro 26, fol. 37; Libro 43, fol. 297. 
? Ibidem, Libro 3, fol. 24, 397; Libro 5, fol. 8, 16, 21. 
* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 3, fol. 248, 250, 252. 


Cuap. I] FINANCIAL INDEPENDENCE 329 


of revision of all the receivers of the local tribunals, whose 
accounts were rendered to it and audited by it.’ 

Still, in theory the money belonged to the crown and its dis- 
bursement could only be made under royal authority. The 
order for the payment of the ayuda de costa of the Suprema, 
July 21, 1517, was drawn in the name of la reyna y el rey—Juana 
and Charles.’ After Charles reached Spain, in September of that 
year, he made grants from the confiscations with a profusion 
that threatened to bankrupt the Inquisition, and if we find 
Adrian and the Suprema also occasionally issuing orders for 
payments it was undoubtedly under powers granted by Charles.’ 
When Charles left Spain, May 20, 1520, he gave Adrian a general 
faculty for this purpose, but it seems to have been called in 
question, for he found it necessary to send from Brussels, Sep- 
tember 12th, a cédula to all receivers confirming it and stating 
that Adrian’s orders, signed by members of the Suprema, would 
be received as vouchers by the auditor-general. Under this 
the Suprema exercised full authority over the funds collected 
by all the receivers and disposed of them at its pleasure. When 
Charles returned he presumably resumed control and, after his 
marriage with Isabel of Portugal, during his frequent absences, 
he left the power in her hands until her death May 1, 1539.4 
When he saw fit, moreover, he claimed and received a share 
of the spoils. A letter of Cardinal Manrique, June 17, 1537, 
shows that a portion of the proceeds of a certain auto de fe had 
been paid to him and another of October 11th, of the same 
year, addressed to him at the Coértes of Monzon, reinforces an 
appeal not to sacrifice the interests of the Inquisition to the 
Aragonese demands, with the welcome news that the receiver 
of Cuenca had arrived with the ten thousand ducats for which 
he had asked from the confiscations of that tribunal.° 

Charles’s hasty departure in November, 1539, to quell the in- 
surrection of Ghent left matters in some confusion. The Suprema, 
on March 20, 1540, wrote to Chancellor Granvelle that cédulas 
for the salaries, under the crown of Aragon, were always signed 
by the emperor and that the inquisitor-general could not do it; 


! Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 76, fol. 227; Sala 40, Lib. 4, fol. 139. 
2 Ibidem, Lib. 5, fol. 16. 

$ Tbidem, Lib. 940, fol. 34. 

¢ Ibidem, Lib. 5, fol. 29; Lib. 73, fol. 106, 107, 301; Lib. 940, fol. 35, 36, 40, 41. 
5 Tbidem, Lib. 78, fol. 162. 


330 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


they had sent him a power for execution similar to that given 
to Cardinal Adrian but he had refused to sign it, saying that 
they could do as under Cardinal Manrique, forgetting that there 
had been the empress who always signed the cédulas, wherefore 
they ask him to get the emperor to sign the power. He doubtless 
did so, for an order, June 12th, on the receiver of Valencia to 
send fifteen hundred ducats for the salaries of the Suprema 
purports to be by virtue of a special power granted by their 
majesties. On Charles’s return he again assumed control and 
when he went to Italy, in 1543, he left Philip as regent, while 
during the absence of Philip there were successive regents who 
signed cédulas as called for by the Suprema.’ 

Yet, in spite of these formalities, the control of the crown was 
becoming scarcely more than nominal. It is true that, in 1537, 
Cardinal Manrique declared that he could not increase salaries 
without the royal assent but, when the crown undertook any 
exercise of power, the little respect paid to its commands is seen 
in the fate of an application made in 1544, by Juan Tomas de 
Prado, notary of the tribunal of Saragossa, to Prince Philip for 
an ayuda de costa of three hundred ducats. Philip ordered his 
prayer to be granted, but the death of Inquisitor-general Tavera 
served as a convenient pretext for disregarding the command. 
It was repeated, for the same amount, January 11, 1548, and 
finally, on June 4th, Inquisitor-general Valdés authorized the 
payment of a hundred ducats.’ 

To perfect the absolute control of the confiscations, thus 
gradually assumed, it was necessary to keep the crown in igno- 
rance of their amount. Its right to them was incontestable, and 
the Inquisition deliberately abused the confidence reposed in 
it when their collection was left in its hands. The less the king 
was allowed to know, the less likely he was to claim his share 
and the policy was adopted of deceiving him. As early as 1560 
we have evidence of this in a letter to the inquisitors of Sicily 
instructing them, when reporting autos de fe to the king, to 
suppress all statements as to the confiscations, but to report 


* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Sala 40, Lib. 4, fol. 107, 110; Lib. 939, 
fol. 134; Lib. 940, fol. 41, 42. 

A pragmatica of 1534, abandoning the royal claim on the confiscations under 
the crown of Aragon, can only have been of temporary effect.—Ibidem, Lib. 939, 
fol. 9. 

2 Ibidem, Lib. 939, fol. 134; Sala 40, Lib. 4, fol. 164. 


Cuap. I] FINANCIAL INDEPENDENCE SOL 


them to the Suprema so that it may determine how far to inform 
him. This was doubtless a general mandate to all the tribunals; 
it was repeated in instructions of 1561 and we shall see that it: 
became a settled practice.’ This systematic concealment was 
the more indefensible from the fact that the Inquisition was. 
now obtaining funds from other sources than confiscations. We 
shall see hereafter how it utilized the scare caused by the dis- 
covery of Protestantism in Valladolid and Seville in 1558, with 
the plea of additional expenses thus caused, to obtain from Paul 
IV a levy of a hundred thousand gold ducats on the revenues: 
of the clergy and the more permanent endowment of a canonry 
to be suppressed for its benefit in every cathedral and collegiate 
church. A large portion of the inquisitors, moreover already 
held canonries and other benefices for which, under a brief of 
Innocent VIII, February 11, 1485, they were dispensed for 
non-residence.” The burden of the Holy Office was thus thrown 
largely on the ecclesiastical establishment, which remonstrated 
and resisted but was compelled to submit. It could thus look 
with equanimity on the shrinkage of the confiscations. In 
Valencia, an agreement was reached, in 1571, by which the 
Moriscos compounded for them with an annual payment to the 
tribunal of twenty-five hundred ducats.* The Judaizing heretics. 
had been largely eliminated, especially the more wealthy ones, 
and it was not until some, years after the conquest of Portugal, 
in 1880, that the influx of Portuguese New Christians brought a. 
new and profitable harvest. 

All this tended to the financial independence of the Inquisition 
although the crown by no means abandoned its claim on the 
confiscations. A book of receipts given by the royal representa- 
tive in Valencia for the proceeds of the confiscations in 1593. 
shows that, under the financial pressure of the time, Philip II 
was reasserting his rights.“ The treasury was empty when 
Philip III succeeded to the throne in 1598 and, among his. 
expedients to raise money, he ordered the receivers of the tri- 
bunals to send to him all the funds in their hands, promising 
speedy repayment. The Suprema had no faith in the royal 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Lib. 80, fol. 2, p. 2; Sala 40, Lib. 4, fol. 252. 

2 Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Lib. I de copias, fol. 201, 203.—Bibl.. 
nacional, Seccion de MSS. R, 90.—Pdramo, p. 138. 

$ Danvila y Collado, Expulsion de los Moriscos, pp. 184-6 (Madrid, 1889). 

# Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 384. 


oon RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


word and instructed the tribunals to retain enough to meet their 
own wants. The obedience of the tribunals was by no means 
prompt and the Suprema was obliged to order Valencia to comply 
with the royal demand and to furnish an oath that no money 
was left.’ 

In the earlier years of Philip IV the tendency of the Inquisi- 
tion to emancipate itself from royal control grew rapidly. We 
shall see hereafter that when, in 1629, the king called for a state- 
ment of salaries and perquisites the Suprema equivocated and 
suppressed nearly all the information required. Still more 
significant was its attitude respecting the colonial tribunals, 
which the king supported under an annual expenditure of thirty 
thousand pesos, with the understanding that this should cease 
when the confiscations should become sufficient. These, which 
had been small at first, rapidly increased in the seventeenth 
century and were enormous between 1630 and 1650, when the 
whole trading communities of Peru and Mexico were shattered, 
enabling the tribunals to make permanent investments that 
rendered them wealthy, besides sending heavy remittances to 
the Suprema, which moreover seized the goods and credits in 
Seville of the colonial Judaizers. In addition to this, in 1627, 
a prebend in each cathedral was suppressed for the benefit of 
the tribunals. Yet the salaries were still demanded of the royal 
treasury and the repeated efforts of Philip III and Philip IV, 
from 1610 to 1650, to obtain statements of the receipts from 
confiscations and pecuniary penances were completely baffled. 
That was an inviolable secret which no royal official was allowed 
to penetrate. It is true that the colonial tribunals, on their side, 
adopted the same policy in concealing, as far as they could, from 
the Suprema the extent of their own gains.’ 

Yet, in the ever-increasing distress of the crown, demands 
were made upon the Inquisition, as on all other departments of 
government, demands which it was forced to meet. Thus, for 
the ten years, 1632 to 1641 inclusive, an annual sum of 2,007,360 
mrs. was required of it, to aid in defraying the cost of garrisons 
and fleet, and a statement of October 11, 1642, shows that it had 
paid the aggregate of 11,583,110 in vellon and 18,700 in silver, 


? Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 5, n. 2, fol. 168, 169, 172. 

* Recop. de las Indias, Lib. 1, Tit. xix, leyes 10, 11, 12, 30, 2 1.—Solorzani de 
Indiar. Gubern. Lib. ITI, cap. xxiv, n. 11—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, 
Leg. 1465, fol, 78; Libro 40, fol. 44, 57, 74, 77, 85, 91, 103, 128, 139. 


Cuap. I] DEMANDS OF THE CROWN 333 


leaving a balance still due of 8,474,790... Evidently there was 
good reason for concealing its revenues. In the frightful con- 
fusion of the finances which followed the revolution of Portugal 
and the revolt of Catalonia, in 1640, while Spain was heroically 
battling for existence against France and its rebellious subjects, 
the demands were varied and incessant—sometimes for sums 
so small as to reveal the absolute penury of the State—and 
Philip’s impatient urgency, as he chafed under the dilatoriness 
of the responses, shows the desperate emergencies in which he 
was involved. In 1643 a royal decree of February 16th ordered 
all officials to send their silver plate to the mint, a watch being 
kept and a report made so as to see that each sent a quantity 
proportioned to his station. To a complaint of delay in per- 
formance the Suprema replied that those who had sent in their 
silver could get no satisfaction from the mint—the delays were 
such that the promptitude required by the king was impossible.’ 

Even more arbitrary was the seizure, in 1644 at Seville, of a 
remittance of 8676 ducats in silver, a remittance from the colo- 
nial tribunals to the Suprema. In protesting against this the 
Suprema, February 29th, gave a deplorable account of its con- 
dition, owing to the demands made upon it by the king. On 
the 10th he had called upon it for 16,000 ducats which it would 
be wholly unable to raise if deprived of the silver that had been 
seized. It was already short in 7,724,843 mrs. of its annual 
expenses and the provincial tribunals were short 5,318,000, for 
it had impoverished them to meet the royal demands. Last 
year it had sold a censo of 18,000 ducats belonging to the tri- 
bunal of Saragossa, which was beseeching its return. It had 
also given the king 10,000 ducats for the cavalry and to raise 
this amount it had taken the sequestrations in the tribunal of 
Seville—a sacred deposit—including 20,000 ducats’ worth of 
wool, the owners of which, having been acquitted, were besieging 
it for their money. This dolorous plaint was effective in so far 
that the seizure at Seville was credited on account of the de- 
mand for 16,000 ducats.2 How much of it was true we can 
only guess, for the Inquisition had means of raising money 
outside of its judicial functions. When, in 1640, the king sum- 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Libro 35, fol. 456. 
2 Ibidem, fol. 281; Libro 21, fol. 224, 251. 
3 Ibidem, Libro 40, fol. 218, 328; Libro 36, fol. 74. 


304 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox IL 


moned its familiars and officials to render military service like 
the nobles, the Suprema arranged that they should buy them- 
selves off, and from this source was chiefly raised 40,000 ducats 
expended on two companies of horse, in return for which, by a 
cédula of September 2, 1641, the king promised to maintain 
inviolate the privileges and exemptions of the familiars and 
officials.’ 

These instances, out of many, will suffice to show how the 
crown, in its days of distress, was recouping itself for abandoning 
the spoils of the heretics. In time these special and arbitrary 
demands were systematized into an annual requirement of fifty 
horses, estimated at an outlay of about 5500 ducats and the 
raising and ‘equipping of two hundred foot, costing 8000 
ducats. The Suprema was in no wise prompt in meeting these 
demands; a cédula of June 24, 1662, tells it that what is due 
for the present year as well as the previous arrears, must be 
paid at once, otherwise an inventory of its property must be 
given to the president of the treasury, who will raise the money 
on it.?, Subsequently there was a feeble attempt to return some 
of these contributions and, in each of the years 1673 and 1674, 
a trifling payment was made of 10,000 reales vellon, but, in 
1676, the Suprema stated to Carlos II that in all it had fur- 
nished for remounts of horses 90,000 ducats vellon and 10,000 
in silver and that its total assistance to the crown had amounted 
to no less than 800,000 pesos, equivalent to over 500,000 ducats, 
to accomplish which the salaries in many tribunals had been 
unpaid and vacancies of necessary offices had remained unfilled.* 
Still, as we shall have occasion to see, the Suprema always had 
money, not only for an undiminished pay-roll but for perquisites 
and amusements. 

The crown could not accept this assistance, however grudg- 
ingly rendered, without a sacrifice of its supremacy and the 
Inquisition came to treat with it as with an independent body. 
About this time the Suprema happens to mention, in a letter 
to the tribunal of Lima, that it had lent the king 40,000 pesos, ~ 
of which 10,000 came from Peru and 30,000 from Mexico and 
that the Count of Medellin had become security for the return 
of the loan, as though it were a banker dealing with a mer- 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 23, fol. 63. 
? Ibidem, Libro 38, fol. 281, 303, 398; Legajo 1465, fol. 36-8, 50. 
3 Ibidem, Libro 40, fol. 85, 139. 


‘CHap, I] CLAIM ON THE CONFISCATIONS 3390 


chant.’ Yet all parties knew that these colonial remittances 
were derived from confiscations, the ownership of which the 
crown had never relinquished. This is the more noteworthy 
because, about this time, the king suddenly asserted his claims 
on some large sums which could not be wholly concealed. 
In 1678 the tribunal of Majorca unexpectedly made a successful 
raid on the whole New Christian population of Palma and, in 
the early months of 1679, there were more than two hundred 
penitents reconciled. As they constituted the active trading 
element of the place the confiscations were enormous and the 
affair attracted too much attention to be hidden. As soon as the 
news came of the arrests, the king wrote, May 20, 1678, to the 
viceroy to look carefully to the sequestrations because, in case 
of confiscation, the proceeds belonged to the treasury. The 
Suprema, however, made him hold his hands off with direful 
threats and kept control of the liquidation. After the con- 
demnations, a consulta of July 5, 1679, shows that 50,000 pesos 
had already been paid to the king, but that the Inquisition was 
resolved to have its full share. In November the king acceded 
to a compromise under which 200,000 pesos were to be used to 
endow certain tribunals and to cancel certain loans made to him 
by the Inquisition—probably those just alluded to. The balance 
coming to him was estimated at 250,000 pesos but, in the 
handling of the assets and the settlements with creditors, the 
property melted away till the Suprema reported that it barely 
sufficed to meet the portion assigned to the Inquisition and 
finally, in 1683, the king had to content himself with 18,000 
pesos spent on the fortifications of Majorca and the payment to 
him of 2000, which the Suprema assured him that it advanced 
at considerable risk to itself. 

The secretiveness so carefully observed undoubtedly had its 
advantages or it would not have been so persistently claimed 
as aright. In a consulta of 1696 the Count of Frigiliana states 
that, when he was viceroy of Valencia, he had in vain endeavored 
to get from the tribunal a statement of its affairs and he asked 
the king whether or not the Inquisition possessed the privilege 
of rendering no account of its assets and income.’ At length 
the quarrel between Inquisitor-general Mendoza and his colleagues, 


1 MSS. of Bibl. nacional of Lima, Legajo 225, Expediente 5278. 
2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 69, fol. 2, 69, 156, 563. 
3 Bibl. nacional, Seccion de MSS Q, 4. 


336 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


in the case of Froilan Diaz, and his banishment to his see in 1703, 
gave opportunity for royal intervention and investigation. The 
War of Succession had deranged the finances of the Inquisition 
and it had appealed to the king for help. He required a state- 
ment of the pay-rolls, investments and revenues of all the tri- 
bunals, which was furnished March 9, 1703, after which, on May 
27th, he issued a decree declaring that he must put an end to the 
abuses and disorders which had crept into the administration 
and disbursement of its property, in order to relieve the embar- 
rassment of which it complained. He therefore annulled all 
commissions and appointments without obligation of service, 
granted by the inquisitor-general, whether within or outside of 
Spain. The papers of all jubilations, new places and gratuities 
created or granted since the time of Valladares (1695) were to 
be placed in his hands. In no case thereafter should the inquisi- 
tor-general jubilate any official of the Suprema or local tribunal 
without consulting him, and any such act issued without a 
previous royal order was declared void. No ayuda de costa or 
grant exceeding thirty ducats vellon, for a single term, was to be 
made without awaiting his decision and this decree was to be 
placed in the hands of all receivers or treasurers for their guid- 
ance. It was so transmitted June 8th, with strict orders for 
its observance. This was a resolute assertion of the royal control 
over the finances of the Inquisition and it held good, in theory 
at least, however much it may have been eluded in practice. 
About the middle of the eighteenth century a systematic writer 
describes it as still in force and states that no salaries can be 
increased without the royal approval. It so continued to the 
end and, under the Restoration, an order from the king, counter- 
signed by the Suprema, was requisite for any extraordinary 
disbursement.’ 

Philip also reasserted and made good the right of the crown to 
the confiscations, by claiming a percentage of the rentals of all 
confiscated property, but he listened to appeals from the tri- 
bunals and, in 1710, we hear of Saragossa and Valencia being 
practically restored to their enjoyment, a liberality which 
was doubtless followed with regard to the others. In 1725 


? Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 10, n. 2, fol. 157.— 
Archivo de Alcala, Estado, Leg. 2843.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, 
Libro 559. 

Jubilation, as we shall see hereafter, consisted in retirement on half-pay. 


Cuap. [] FINES AND PENANCES 337 


Valencia expressed its fear that the alliance with Austria against 
England, France and Prussia would result in its having to restore 
the confiscations, and the blow seems to have fallen for, in 1727, 
the suprema, in a consulta of December 9th, describing the 
poverty of Saragossa, attributes it to the king having taken 
away the confiscations which he had granted. With the gradual 
amelioration in the Spanish finances, this source of revenue 
must have been restored, for, in 1768, the Inquisition is de- 
scribed as enjoying the confiscations which the pious liberality 
of the monarchs had bestowed.’ 


There were other sources of revenue—rehabilitations or dis- 
pensations from the sanbenito and disabilities, commutations 
of punishment and the pecuniary penances known as penas y 
penitencias. All these will be considered hereafter, but a few 
words may be said as to the latter in their relation with the royal 
authority. 

The penitents who were reconciled under Edicts of Grace 
were not subject to confiscation, but were punished with fines: 
under the guise of pecuniary penance, at the discretion of the 
inquisitor. We have seen (pp. 169-70) how numerous these 
were and we can conjecture how large were the sums thus exacted, 
for penances of a half or a third of the penitent’s property were 
not uncommon. Similar fines also usually accompanied sen- 
tences that did not embrace confiscation and formed a continual 
although fluctuating source of revenue. Sometimes there were 
special officials for their collection but, when this was entrusted 
to the receivers of confiscations, they were instructed to keep a 
separate account of them, as the two funds were held to be 
essentially different and, as a rule, were to be employed for 
different purposes. 

In the earliest Instructions of 1484, these pecuniary penances. 
are said to be imposed as a limosna, or alms, to aid the sovereigns. 
in the pious work of warring with the Moors, but, in the Instruc- 
tions issued a few months later by Torquemada, this is modi- 
fied by ordering them to be placed in the hands of a trustworthy 
person and reports to be made to him or to the king, in order 
that they may be spent on the war or in other pious uses or in 


1 Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 13, n. 2, fol. 6, 13, 17; 
Leg. 14, n. 1, fol. 42.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 27, fol. 87; 


Libro 28, fol. 275. 
22 


338 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


paying the salaries of the Inquisition.’ Both the destination 
and the control of these funds were thus left undetermined and 
they so continued for some years. In 1486 we find Ferdinand 
giving orders for sums from this source for various uses—for the 
war with Granada, to pay the salaries of a lay judge, to pay 
expenses of a tribunal of the Inquisition, to repay Luis de Sant- 
angel for advances made to tribunals; in one case his tone is 
apologetic and he asks Torquemada to confirm the order, in 
others his command is absolute.’ 

This indicates the uncertainty which existed both as to the 
use and the control of the pecuniary penances. So long as lasted 
the war with Granada, whatever was taken by the crown might 
be regarded as devoted, directly or indirectly, to that holy object, 
but when the conquest was achieved, in January, 1492, that 
excuse no longer existed and doubtless the inquisitors looked 
with jealousy upon the diversion to secular objects of the proceeds 
of their pious labors. The confiscations unquestionably be- 
longed to the crown, but the penances were spiritual funds which 
for centuries had always enured to the Church. There must 
have been a sustained effort to withhold them from the royal 
acquisitiveness, to which Ferdinand was not disposed to yield, 
for he procured from Alexander VI, February 18, 1495, a brief 
directing the inquisitors to hold all such moneys subject to 
the control of the sovereigns, to be disposed of at their pleasure. 
Even this was resisted and Ferdinand and Isabella complained 
to the pope that they were unable to compel an accounting of 
the sums received or to collect the amounts, to correct which 
Alexander issued another brief, March 26, 1495, commissioning 
Ximenes, then Archbishop of Toledo, to enforce accounting 
and payment by excommunication and other censures.® 

This was equally ineffective. There was a privacy and sim- 
plicity in the imposition and collection of a penance very differ- 
ent from the procedure of sequestration and confiscation, and 
Ferdinand, at least for a time, abandoned the struggle. This 
is manifested by a clause in the Instructions of 1498, enjoining 
on inquisitors not to impose penances more heavily than justice 


‘ Instruciones de 1484, 22 3, 7 (Arguello, fol. 3, 4)—Archivo de Simancas, 
Inquisicion, Lib. 933. (See Appendix.) 

? Archivo gén. de la C. de A., Reg. 3684, fol. 83, 89, 102. 

3 Boletin, XV, 594, 596. 


CuaP I] FINES AND PENANCES 339 


requires in order to insure the payment of their salaries,’ and 
the principle was formally recognized by Ferdinand and Isabella 
in a cédula of January 12, 1499, reciting that, although they held 
a papal brief placing at their disposal all moneys arising from 
penances, commutations and rehabilitations, yet they grant to 
the inquisitors-general all collections from these sources, both 
in Castile and Aragon, to be used in paying salaries, disburse- 
ments being made only on their order.’ 

Ferdinand, however, was not disposed to relax, on any point, 
his control over the Inquisition and, on April 10th of the same 
year, we find him forbidding the levying of penances on the 
members of a town-council for fautorship of heresy—doubtless 
a speculative infliction for some assumed neglect in arresting 
suspects. In 1501 his renunciation is already forgotten and 
he is making grants from the penances as absolutely as ever— 
even empowering Inquisitor-general Deza to use those of Valen- 
cia, to the extent of a hundred ducats a year for the salary of 
Jaime de Muchildos, the Roman agent of the Inquisition.? So, 
in 1511, we find him granting to Enguera, Inquisitor-general 
of Aragon, a thousand libras out of the penances to defray the 
expenses of his bulls for the see of Lérida and authorizing him 
to pay from them an ayuda de costa of two hundred ducats to 
Joan de Gualbes, a member of the Aragonese Suprema. ‘Then, 
in 1514, he places all the penances unreservedly at the disposal 
of Inquisitor-general Mercader to be employed on the salaries 
and other necessary expenses of the Inquisition of Aragon. This 
seems to have been final. After his death, instructions sent to 
the tribunal of Sicily assume that the inquisitor-general has 
sole and absolute control. It was the same in Castile. Instruc- 
tions issued by Ximenes, in 1516, direct the receiver-general, 
who was an Officer of the Suprema, to collect the penances from 
the receivers of the tribunals, who were to keep them in a sepa- 
rate account and not to disburse them without an order from 
the inquisitor-general. After this we find the Suprema in full 
control.* 

There is virtually no trace of any interference subsequently 


1 Instruciones de 1498, 3 5. (Arguello, fol. 12.) 

2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 1; Libro 933. 

3 Ibidem, Libro 1; Libro 2, fol. 9. 

* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 3, fol. 135, 137, 169, 270; Libro 933, 
fol. 125; Libro 72, P. 1, fol. 72; P. 2, fol. 20. (Arguello, fol. 20, 25.) 


340 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


by the crown, and the Inquisition found itself in possession of 
an independent and by no means inconsiderable source of 
revenue which it could levy, almost at will, from those who fell 
into its hands. The only exception to this that I have met is 
that Philip IV, in his financial distress, by a decree of September 
30, 1639, claimed and collected twenty-five per cent. of fines, 
but he scrupulously limited this to those inflicted in cases not 
connected with the faith—that is, in the exercise of the royal 
jurisdiction, civil and criminal, enjoyed by the Inquisition in 
matters concerning familiars and other officials.’ 


Though, as we have seen, the independence of the Inqui- 
sition, as a self-centered and self-sustaining institution in the 
State, varied with the temper and the necessities of the sovereign, 
there was a time when it seemed as though it might throw off 
all subjection and become dominant. But for the prudence of 
Ferdinand, in insisting upon the power of appointment and 
dismissal, this might have happened in the temper of the Span- 
ish people, trained to an exaltation of detestation of heresy 
which to us may well appear incomprehensible. There is no 
question that, under the canon law, kings, like their subjects, 
were amenable to the jurisdiction of the Inquisition and that 
they held their kingdoms on the tenure not only of their own 
orthodoxy but of purging their lands of heresy and _ heretics. 
The principles which had been worked so effectually for the 
destruction of the Houses of Toulouse and of Hohenstaufen 
and under which Pius V released the subjects of Queen Eliza- 
beth from their allegiance, in 1570, were fully recognized in 
Spain as vital to the faith.” But beyond this the Spaniards, in 
the exuberance of their religious ardor, boasted that their 
national institutions conditioned orthodoxy as necessary to 
their kingship. Even when the seventeenth century was well 
advanced, a learned and loyal jurisconsult tells us that, from 
the time of the sixth Council of Toledo, in 638, their monarchs 
had imposed on themselves the law that, if they fell into heresy, 
they were to be excommunicated and exterminated; that Ferdi- 
nand, in 1492, had renewed this law and that he had instituted 
that most severe tribunal the Inquisition and had sanctioned 


1 MSS. of Royal Library of Copenhagen, 218), p. 236. 
? Simance de Cathol. Institt. Tit. xxiii—Cf. R. Bellarmini de Potestate Papz 
cap. 3. 


Cuap. I] IRRESPONSIBILITY 341 


that, in view of the Toledan canon, all kings in future should be 
subject to it... Even Spanish loyalty could not have been relied 
upon to sustain a king suspect of heresy, against the claims of 
the Holy Office to try him in secret, and suspicion of heresy 
was a very elastic term. Impeding the Inquisition came within 
its definition and any effort to curb the arrogant extension of 
its powers could readily be so construed, as Macanaz found to 
his sorrow. The fact that the Inquisition possessed such power 
must have had its infiuence more than once on the mind of the 
sovereign when engaged in debate with his too powerful subject 
and perhaps explains what appears to us occasionally a pusil- 
lanimous yielding. 

The monarchs had guarded the Inquisition against all super- 
vision and all accountability to the other departments of govern- 
ment. Within its own sphere it was supreme and irresponsible 
and its sphere, owing to the exemption from the secular courts 
accorded to all connected with it in however remote a degree, 
covered a large area of civil and criminal business, besides its 
proper function of preserving the purity of the faith. In this 
self-centered independence it stood alone. Even the spiritual 
jurisdiction of the Church, so jealously guarded, had become 
subject to the recurso de fuerza, which, like the French appel 
comme d’abus, gave to those who suffered wrong an appeal to 
the Council of Castile? But even from this the Inquisition was 
exempt. A decree of Prince Philip, in 1553, was its egis and was 
constantly invoked. This was addressed to all the courts and 
judicial officers of the land and affirmed, in the most positive 
terms, the sole and exclusive jurisdiction of the Inquisition in all 
matters within its competence, civil or criminal, concerning the 
faith or confiscations—and faith was a convenient term cover- 
ing the impeding of the Inquisition in all that it wanted to do. 
Philip recited that repeated cédulas of Ferdinand and Isabella 
and of Charles V had asserted this and now he reaffirmed and 
enforced it. No appeals from its tribunals were to be entertained, 


1 Solorzani de Jure Indiarum, Tom. I, Lib. m1, cap. i, n. 92.—In this Solorzano 
exaggerates cap. 3 of the Sixth Council of Toledo (Aguirre, ITI, 409). 

All this is seriously brought forward by Antonio de Ayala, fiscal of Valencia, 
in an argument to prove the exemption from taxation of the Inquisition.—Arch. 
hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 1, no. 1, fol. 11. 

2 Cortes de Madrigal, 1476 (Cértes de los antiguos Reinos, IV, 74, 80).— 
Nueva Recop. Lib. n, Tit. v, leyes 36-39.—Salgado de Somoza, De Regia Pro- 
tectione, P. 1, cap. 1, 2. 


342 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


for the only appeal lay to the Suprema, which would redress 
any wrong, for it, by delegation from the crown and the Holy 
See, had exclusive cognizance of such matters. If therefore 
anything concerning the Inquisition should be brought before 
them they must decline to entertain it and must refer it back to 
the Holy Office.’ 

The Inquisition was not content to enjoy these favors as a 
revocable grace from the crown but, in a consulta of December 
22, 1634, it advanced the claim that this decree was a bargain 
or compact between two powers which could not be in any way 
modified without mutual consent.? This was emphasized in a 
printed argument in 1642, asserting that that transaction could 
only become of binding force by the consent of both parties 
—the king and the inquisitor-general—and the king had no 
power to change it of his own motion, as it was an agreement. 
Even were it admitted to be a concession granted by the crown, 
this would make no difference, for a privilege conceded to one 
who is not a subject (as the Inquisition in the present case) 
and accepted by the latter becomes a contract which the prince 
cannot revoke.® 

We shall see hereafter the use made of this by the Inquisition 
in its daily quarrels with all the other jurisdictions, but a single 
case may be cited here to indicate how it utilized this position 
to render itself virtually independent. There was a long-stand- 
ing debate over canonries in the churches of Antequera, Malaga 
and the Canaries, which it claimed to be suppressed for its 
benefit under the brief of January 7, 1559, but which the royal 
Camara asserted to belong to the patronage of the king, whose 
rights of appointment were not curtailed by the brief. A suit 
on the subject, commenced in 1562, was not yet decided when, 
about 1611, the king filled vacancies in Mélaga and the Canaries. 
This provoked a discussion, during which, without awaiting 
settlement, the inquisitors excommunicated the appointees— 
and an inquisitorial excommunication could be removed only 


* This cédula is not included in the Recopilaciones, but is printed by Salgado 
de Somoza, De Retentione Bullarum, P. 11, cap. xxxiii, n. 13, and by Portocarrero, 
op. cit., 3 74. There are also copies in Bibl. nacional, MSS., Ce, 58, fol. 5; Archivo 
de Simancas, Lib. 30, fol. 146; Lib. 939, fol. 300, and in MSS. of Library of Univ. 
of Halle, Yc, Tom. 17. 

? Archivo de Simancas, Libro 20, fol. 340. 

$ MSS. of Bodleian Library, Arch. S, 130. 


Cuap, I] EFFORTS AT INDEPENDENCE 343 


by him who had fulminated it, by the inquisitor-general or by 
the pope. In 1611 the king ordered the appointees to be absolved 
and mandates signed by him to that effect were addressed to the 
inquisitors of Mdlaga and the Canaries. The Suprema com- 
plained loudly of this as an unheard of violation of the rights 
of the Holy Office and refused obedience. In 1612 it declared 
that, when the appointees abandoned the prebends which they 
had usurped, they should be absolved and not before. On Febru- 
ary 12th, in a consulta to the king, it argued that its power had 
always been so great and so independent of all other bodies 
in the State that the kings had never allowed them to interfere 
with it, directly or indirectly ; it determined for itself everything 
relating to itself, consulting only with the king and permitting 
no interference of any kind. Its determination prevailed over 
the weakness of the king who ordered the Camara to desist 
from its pretensions and not to despoil the Holy Office.’ 

These somewhat audacious assertions of independence were 
chiefly stimulated by the perpetual quarrels arising from the 
exclusive jurisdiction, civil and criminal, exercised by the Inqui- 
sition over its thousands of employees and familiars and their 
families, which kept the land in confusion. This is a subject 
which will require detailed consideration hereafter and is only 
referred to here because of its development into the exaggerated 
pretensions of the Inquisition to emancipate itsef from all con- 
trol. When Ferdinand granted this fuero it was understood 
on all hands to be a special deputation of the royal jurisdiction 
and as such liable at any time to modification or revocation. 
Ferdinand himself, in a cédula of August 18, 1501, alluded to it 
as such—the inquisitors enjoyed it just as the corregidors did.’ 
So, in the Concordia of Castile, in 1553, defining the extent of 
this jurisdiction, the inquisitors are specially described as hold- 
ing it from the king, and Philip IJ, Philip III and Philip IV 
repeatedly alluded to it as held during the royal pleasure.® 
There was no thought of disputing this until the seventeenth 
century was well advanced. The Suprema itself, in papers of 
1609, 1619, 1637 and 1639 freely admitted that its temporal 


1 Bibl. nacional, Seccion de MSS., X, 157, fol. 244. 

2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 13, fol. 16—Llorente, Afiales, I, 
277. 

3 Nueva Recop. Libro rv, Tit. 1, ley 18—Consulta magna, 1696 (Bibl. nacional, 
Seccion de MSS., Q, 4). 


344 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


jurisdiction was a grant from the king, while its spiritual was a 
grant from the pope.’ 

Apparently the earliest departure from this universally con- 
ceded position was made, in 1623, by Portocarrero in an argu- 
ment on a clash of jurisdictions in Majorca, wherein he sought 
to prove that the civil and criminal jurisdiction of the Inquisition 
over its subordinates was ecclesiastical and derived from the 
pope.” About the same time, in an official paper, a similar 
claim was advanced, based on the papal briefs authorizing 
Torquemada and his successors to appoint, dismiss and punish 
their subordinates.* These were mere speculations and attracted 
no attention at the time. We have just seen that as late as 
1639 the Suprema made no claims of the kind but two years 
later, in 1641, it suddenly adopted them in the most offensive 
fashion. There was a competencia, or conflict of jurisdiction, 
between the tribunal of Valladolid and the chancilleria or high 
royal court; the Council of Castile had occasion to present several 
consultas to the king, in one of which it said that the jurisdiction 
exercised in the name of the king by the Inquisition was temporal, 
secular and precarious and could not be defended by excom- 
munication. Thereupon the Suprema assembled its theologians 
who pronounced these propositions to be false, rash and akin 
to heretical error; armed with this opinion the fiscal, or prose- 
cuting officer, accused the whole Council of Castile, demanded 
that its consulta be suppressed and that its authors be prose- 
cuted. Theoretically there was nothing to prevent such action, 
which would have rendered the Inquisition the dominating 
power in the land, but the Suprema lacked hardihood; even the 
habitual subservience of Philip IV was revolted and he told the 
inquisitor-general that he had done ill to lend himself to a ques- 
tion contrary to the sovereignty of the monarch and to the honor 
of the highest council of the nation.* 

In spite of this rebuff, having once asserted the claim that 
its temporal jurisdiction was spiritual and not secular, the 
Inquisition adhered to it. The prize was worth a struggle, for 
it would have put the whole nation at its mercy. It would have 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Libro 927, fol. 323; Libro 21, fol. 84, 110; Libro 50, 
fol. 82.—Bibl. nacional, Seccion de MSS., X, 157, fol. 244. 

? Portocarrero, Sobre la Competencia, etc., 3 52. 

§ Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 940, fol. 196. 

* Llorente, Hist. erft. Cap. xxv, Art. ii, n. 20-4. 


Cuap. I] EFFORTS AT INDEPENDENCE 345 


deprived the king of powers to check aggression and to protect 
his subjects from oppression for, as Portocarrero had pointed 
out, although princes have authority to relieve their subjects 
when aggrieved by other secular subjects, they have none when 
the oppressors are ecclesiastics, exempt by divine law from their 
jurisdiction.’ To win this the Inquisition persisted in its claim. 
In 1642, on the occasion of a competencia in Granada, there 
appeared, under its authority, a printed argument to prove 
that the temporal Jurisdiction of the Holy Office was a grant 
from the Holy See, which had power to intervene in the internal 
affairs of States and that it had merely been acquiesced in and 
confirmed by the kings.” Again, in a notorious case occurring 
in Cuenca in 1645, the inquisitors argued that their temporal 
jurisdiction was ecclesiastical and papal, with which the king 
could not interfere. But the audacity with which these preten- 
sions were pushed culminated in a consulta presented by the 
Suprema, March 31, 1646, to Philip IV, when he was struggling 
against the determination of the Cértes of Aragon to curb the 
excesses of the Inquisition. 

In this paper the Suprema asserted that the civil and political 
jurisdiction is inferior to the spiritual and ecclesiastical, which 
can assume by indirect power whatever is necessary for its 
conservation and unimpeded exercise, without being restricted 
by secular princes. The royal prerogative is derived from posi- 
tive human law or the law of nations; the supreme power of the 
Inquisition is delegated by the Holy See for cases of faith with 
all that is requisite, directly or indirectly, for its untrammelled 
enjoyment; this is of divine law and, as such, is superior to 
all human law, to which it is in no way subject. The very least 
that can be said is that princes are bound to admit this, and 
though they have a right to concede no more than is requisite, 
the decision as to what is requisite rests with the ecclesiastical 
authority, which is based on divine law. Any departure from 
these principles, under the novel pretext that the king is master 
of this jurisdiction, with power to limit or abrogate, is dangerous 
for the conscience and very perilous as leading to the gravest 


1 Portocarrero, op. cit., 2 73. 

2 Por la Jurisdiction de la Inquisicion de la Ciudad y Reyno de Granada, 
Granada, 1642 (MSS. of Bodleian Library, Arch. S., 130). 

8 Bibl. nacional, Seccion de MSS., D, 118, fol. 151. 


346 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


errors. It would be difficult to enunciate more boldly the 
theory of theocracy, with the Inquisition as its delegate and 
the crown merely the executor of its decrees. 

These pretensions were not realized and the king was not 
reduced to insignificance, but his power was seriously trammelled 
by the bureaucracy of which the Suprema was the foremost and 
most aggressive representative. Its quasi-independence led to 
emulation by the other great departments of the State and, 
though their success was not so marked, it was sufficient in all 
to render the government incredibly cumbersome and inefficient 
and to paralyze its action by wasting its strength in efforts to 
keep the peace between the rival and warring bodies. In these 
bickerings and dissensions the power of the crown decreased 
and the theoretically autocratic monarch found himself unable 
to enforce his commands. Philip IV recognized this fatal weak- 
ness, but his efforts to overcome the evil were puerile and 
inefficient. October 15, 1633, he sent to the Suprema, and pre- 
sumably to the other councils, a decree setting forth emphatically 
that the slackness of obedience and disregard of the royal com- 
mands had been the cause of irreparable damage to the State 
and must be checked if the monarchy were to be preserved 
from ruin. It was his duty, under God, to prevent this; he had 
unavailingly represented it repeatedly to his councillors and 
now he proposed to make out a schedule of penalties, to be 
incurred through disobedience, scaled according to the gravity 
of each offence. This was to be completed within twenty days 
and he called upon the Suprema to give him the necessary infor- 
mation that should enable him to tabulate the matters coming 
within its sphere of action. 

This grotesque measure, calling upon offenders to define their 
offences for the purpose of providing condign punishment, was 
received by the Suprema with a cool indifference showing how 
lightly it regarded the royal indignation. There was nothing, 
it said in reply, within its jurisdiction which imperilled the 
monarchy, for its function was to preserve the monarchy by 
preserving the unity of religion. As for obedience, it was of 
the highest importance that the royal commands should be 


? Archivo gén. de la Corona de Aragon, Legajo 528.—For some extracts from 
this paper see Appendix. 

Various papers on both sides of these questions will be found in the Simancas 
archives, Libro 62, fol. 160, 312. 


Cuap. I] EFFORTS AT INDEPENDENCE 347 


obeyed and the laws provided punishments for all disobedient 
vassals. But the canon and imperial laws and those of Spain 
deprived of their places judges, who executed royal cédulas 
issued against justice and the rights of parties, for it was assumed 
that such could not be the royal intention and that they were 
decreed in. ignorance, so that they were suspended until the 
prince, better informed, should provide justice. Therefore when 
councillors opposed cédulas which would work great injury to 
the jurisdiction and immunities of the Holy Office, it was only 
to prevent innovation and it was in the discharge of duty that 
this was represented to the king. The Suprema therefore prayed 
him that, before determining matters proposed by other councils, 
they should be submitted to it as heretofore so that, after hearing 
the reasons of both sides, he might determine according to his 
pleasure.” Thus with scarcely veiled contempt the Suprema 
told him that it would continue to do as it had done and the 
very next year, as we have seen, it boldly informed him that 
none of his commands respecting the Inquisition would be obeyed 
until it should have confirmed them—commands, be it remem- 
bered, that in no case affected its action in matters of faith, for 
all the trouble arose from its encroachments on secular affairs. 

The character of Philip IV ripened and strengthened under 
adversity and, in the exigencies of the struggle with Catalonia 
and Portugal, he developed some traits worthy of a sovereign. 
Although he meekly endured the insolence of the Suprema 
in 1646 and labored strenuously with the Cértes of Aragon to 
prevent the reform of abuses, he yet, as we have seen, insisted 
on the right to supervise appointments. He doubtless asserted 
his authority in other ways for the Suprema abated its preten- 
sions that its civil and criminal jurisdiction was spiritual and 
papal. In an elaborate consulta of March 12, 1668, during a 
long and dreary contest, in which the tribunal of Majorca was 
involved, it repeatedly refers to its enjoying the royal jurisdic- 
tion from the king, showing that it had abandoned the attempt 
to render itself independent of the royal authority.’ 

Under the imbecile Carlos II and his incapable ministers, the 
domineering arrogance of the Inquisition increased and, as we 
shall see hereafter, it successfully eluded a concerted movement, 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 32, fol. 56, 58. (See Appendix.) 
? Ibidem, Libro 25, fol. 58. 


348 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


in 1696, of all the other councils, represented in the Junta 
Magna, to reduce its exuberance. With the advent of the House 
of Bourbon, however, it was forced to recognize its subordination 
to the royal will in temporal matters, in spite of the temporary 
interference of Elisabeth Farnese in favor of Inquisitor-general 
Giudice. We have already seen indications of this and shall 
see more; meanwhile a single instance will suffice to show how 
imperiously Philip V, under the guidance of Macanaz, could 
impose his commands. In 1712 there was an echo of the old 
quarrel over the so-called suppressed canonries of Antequera, 
Malaga and the Canaries (p. 342). The suit, commenced in 1562, 
had never been decided and had long been suspended. The 
trouble of 1612 had been quieted by allowing the Inquisition 
to enjoy the canonries, not as a right, but as a revocable grant 
from the crown; excesses committed by the inquisitors in col- 
lecting the fruits led to the resumption of the benefices and 
then, by a transaction in 1622, they were restored under the 
same conditions. Such was the position when a violent quarrel 
arose in the Canaries between the tribunal and the chapter. 
The former questioned the accuracy of the accounts rendered 
to it and demanded the account books. This the chapter refused 
but offered to place the books in the accounting room of the 
cathedral, allowing the officials of the tribunal free access and 
permission to make what copies they desired. There was also 
a subsidiary quarrel over the claim that, when the secretary of 
the tribunal went to the chapter, he should be entitled to prece- 
dence. With their customary violence the inquisitors publicly 
excommunicated and fined the dean and treasurer of the chapter 
and moreover they took under their protection the Dominican 
Joseph Guillen, Prior of San Pedro Martir, who was a notary 
of the tribunal. He circulated a defamatory libel on the chapter 
which laid a complaint before his superior, the Provincial; the 
latter commenced to investigate, when the tribunal inhibited him 
from all cognizance of the matter. Then there came a mandate 
from the Dominican General to the Provincial, relegating Fray 
Guillen to a convent and ordering a president to be appointed 
for San Pedro Martir, whereupon the tribunal required the 
Provincial to surrender this mandate and all papers concerning 
the affair, under. pain of excommunication and two hundred 
ducats. The sub-prior of San Pedro Martir was forced to assem- 
ble the brethren, whom the inquisitors ordered to disobey the 


Cuap., I] REASSERTION OF ROYAL SUPREMACY 349 


commands of the General and not to acknowledge the president 
appointed under his instructions, thus violating the statutes 
of the great Dominican Order and the principle of obedience on 
which it was based. They further excommunicated the Provincial 
in the most solemn manner; they took by force Fray Guillen 
from the convent and paraded the streets in his company; the 
whole community was thrown into confusion and to prevent 
recourse to the home authorities they forbade, under heavy 
penalties, the departure of any vessel for Teneriffe, through 
which communication was had with Spain. In all this there 
was nothing at variance with the customary methods of asserting 
the lawless supremacy of the Inquisition over the secular and 
spiritual authorities, but Philip V ordered Giudice, September 
30, 1712, to put an end to these excesses and, on October 11th, 
the Suprema reported that it had ordered the inquisitors to 
desist. If it did so, they paid no attention to its commands. 
Then, June 11, 1713, he addressed a peremptory order to Giudice 
to revoke all that had been done in the Canaries, to recall the 
inquisitors, to dismiss them and give them no other appointments. 
The Suprema replied, July 18th, enclosing an order which it 
proposed despatching; this displeased him as not in compliance 
with his commands and he insisted on their complete fulfilment. 
Still there was evasion and delay and when, in July, 1714, the 
Canary chapter presented to the tribunal royal orders requiring 
the removal of the excommunications and the remission of the 
fines, the inquisitors not only refused obedience but commenced 
proceedings against the notaries who served them. The Suprema 
professed to have sent orders similar to those of the king, but it 
evidently had been playing a double game. Philip therefore, 
November 1, 1714, addressed the inquisitor-general, holding 
the Suprema responsible for the prolonged contumacy of the 
inquisitors; he ordered it to deliver to him the originals of all 
the correspondence on the subject and required the inquisitor- 
general to issue an order for the immediate departure from the 
islands of the inquisitors and fiscal, without forcing the governor 
to expel them, as he had orders to do so in case of disobedience. 
Moreover, if the Suprema should not, within fifteen days, deliver 
all the documents, so that the king could regulate matters 
directly with the tribunal, the old suspended suit would be 
reopened and such action would be taken as might be found 
requisite. This was a tone wholly different from that to which 


350 RELATIONS WITH THE CROWN [Boox II 


the Inquisition had been accustomed under the Hapsburgs; 
the evasions and delays of the Suprema, which had so long been 
successful, proved fruitless. The struggle was prolonged, but 
the royal authority prevailed in the end, although, when the 
inquisitors reached Spain, in the summer of 1715, Giudice had 
been restored to office and Philip weakly permitted them to be 
provided for in other tribunals and to curse fresh communities 
with their lawless audacity.’ 

We shall hereafter have occasion to see how, under the House 
of Bourbon, with its Gallican ideas as to royal prerogative, the 
subordination of the Inquisition became recognized, while its 
jurisdiction was curtailed and its influence was diminished. 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Legajo 1465, fol. 2-8.—MSS. of Library 
of Univ. of Halle, Yc, 20, Tom. 17. 


CHAPTER II. 
SUPEREMINENCE. 


Wuen the Inquisition, as we have seen, arrogated to itself 
almost an equality with the sovereign, it necessarily assumed 
supremacy over all other bodies in the State. Spain had been 
won to the theory, assiduously taught by the medieval Church, 
that the highest duty of the civil power was the maintenance 
of the faith in its purity and the extermination of heresy and 
heretics. The institution to which this duty was confided there- 
fore enjoyed pre-eminence over all other departments of the 
State and the latter were bound, whenever called upon, to lend 
it whatever aid was necessary. To refuse to assist it, to criticise 
it, or even to fail in demonstrations of due respect to those who 
performed its awful functions, were thus offences to be punished 
at its pleasure. 

Allusion has already been made (p. 182) to the oath required 
of officials at the founding of the Inquisition, pledging obedience 
and assistance, whenever an inquisitor came to a place to set 
up his tribunal. This was not enough, for feudalism still disputed 
jurisdiction with the crown, and the. inquisitor was directed to 
summon the barons before him and make them take not only 
the popular oath but one promising to allow the Inquisition 
free course in their lands, failing which they were to be prose- 
cuted as rebels." As the tribunals became fixed in their several 
seats, when a new inquisitor came he brought royal letters, 
addressed to all officials, from the viceroy down, commanding 
them, under penalty of five thousand florins, to lend him and 
his subordinates what aid was necessary and to obey his mandates 
in making arrests and executing his sentences, and this was 
published in a formal proclamation, with sound of trumpets, 
by the viceroy or other royal representative.? This was not an 
empty formality. When, in 1516, the Corregidor of Logrofio, the 


1 Instrucciones de 1484, 3 21. (Arguello, fol. 7.) 
2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 31, fol. 193, 194. (See Appendix.) 
(351 ) 


352 SUPEREMINENCE [Boox IL 


Comendador Barrientos, a knight of Santiago, ventured to assert 
that the familiars were not to be assisted in making an arrest, 
the inquisitors excommunicated him and ordered him to seek the 
inquisitor-general and beg for pardon, which was granted only 
on condition of his appearance in a public auto de fe, after hear- 
ing mass as a penitent, on his knees and holding a candle, after 
which he was to be absolved with stripes and the other humilia- 
tions inflicted on penitents.* This was not merely an indignity but 
a lasting mark of infamy, extending to the kindred and posterity. 

As though this were not sufficient, at a somewhat later period, 
the officials of all cities where tribunals were established were 
required to take an elaborate oath to the inquisitors, in which 
they swore to compel every one within their jurisdiction to 
hold the Catholic faith, to persecute all heretics and their ad- 
herents, to seize and bring them before the Inquisition and to 
denounce them, to commit no public office to such persons nor 
to any who were prohibited by the inquisitors, nor to receive 
them in their families; to guard all the pre-eminences, privileges, 
exemptions and immunities of the inquisitors, their officials and 
familiars; to execute all sentences pronounced by the inquisitors 
and to be obedient to God, to the Roman Church and to the 
inquisitors and their successors.” In this, the clause pledging 
observance of the privileges and exemptions of the officials was 
highly important for, as we shall see hereafter, the privileges 
claimed by the Inquisition were the source of perpetual and 
irritating quarrels with the, royal and local magistrates. It was 
an innovation of the middle of the sixteenth century, for Prince 
Philip, in a letter of December 2, 1553, to the tribunal of Valencia, 
says that he hears it requires the royal officials to swear to main- 
tain the privileges, usages and customs of the Inquisition; this he 
says is a novelty and, as he does not approve of innovations, he 
asks what authority it has for such requirement. To this the 
answer was that every year, when the municipal officials enter 
upon their duties, they come and take such an oath and the records 
showed that this had been observed for a hundred years without. 
contradiction. This seems to have silenced his objections and 


* Llorente, Hist. crit. Cap. xxv1, Art. 3, n. 11. 

* Pablo Garcia, Orden de Procesar, fol. 73.—This is an official manual com- 
piled by the Aragonese secretary of the Suprema. Originally issued about 1568 
it was reprinted in 1592, 1607 and 1628. My references are to the last edition. 

A somewhat different formula of this oath is given by Pdramo, p. 573. 


Cuap. IT] OATHS OF OBEDIENCE 303 


the formula became general. The Valencia Concordia, or agree- 
ment of 1554, simply provides that the secular magistrates shall 
take the accustomed oath and what that was is doubtless shown. 
by the one taken, in 1626, by the almotacen, or sealer of weights: 
and measures, when he came to the Inquisition and swore on 
the cross and the gospels to observe the articles customarily 
read to the royal officials and to guard the privileges of the Holy 
Office and defend it with all his power.’ 

Even all this was insufficient to emphasize the universal 
subordination. At all autos de fe, which were attended by the 
highest in the land as well as by the lowest, and at the annual 
proclamation of the Edict of Faith, to which the whole population 
was summoned, a notary of the Inquisition held up a cross and 
addressed the people: “Raise your hands and let each one say 
that he swears by God and Santa Maria and this cross and the 
words of the holy gospels, that he will favor and defend and aid 
the holy Catholic faith and the holy Inquisition, its ministers: 
and officials, and will manifest and make known each and every 
heretic, fautor, defender and receiver of heretics and all disturbers: 
and impeders of the Holy Office, and that he will not favor, or 
help, or conceal them but, as soon as he knows of them, he will 
denounce them to the inquisitors; and if he does otherwise that. 
God may treat him as those who knowingly perjure themselves: 
Let every one say Amen!’” When the sovereign was present at. 
an auto this general oath did not suffice and he took a special 
one. Thus, at the Valladolid auto of May 21, 1559, the Inquisi-- 
tor-general Valdés administered it to the Regent Juana and at 
that of Madrid, in 1632, Inquisitor-general Zapata went to the 
window at which Philip IV was seated, with a missal and a cross, 
on which the king swore to protect and defend the Catholic: 
faith as long as he lived and to aid and support the Inquisition 
—an oath which was then duly read aloud to the people.* Thus. 
the whole nation was bound, in the most solemn manner, to: 
be obedient to the Inquisition and to submit to what it might 
assert to be its privileges. 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 688, fol. 514.—MSS. of Bodleian 
Library, Arch. S, 130.—Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Legajo. 
UES byl ake Te ce) Bye Bien 

* Orden de Procesar, fol. 72. 

’ Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 12, fol. 29.—Bibl. nacionale de- 
France, fonds frangais, 2881, fol. 7 

23 


354 SUPEREMINENCE [Boox II 


How purely ministerial were the functions of the public offiec- 
ials in all that related to’ the Inquisition, even under Philip V, 
was illustrated when, at Barcelona, in an auto de fe, June 28, 
1715, a bigamist named Medrano was sentenced to two hundred 
lashes to be inflicted on the 30th. On the 29th word was sent to 
the public executioner to be ready to administer them, but the 
Viceroy, the Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo, forbade the executioner 
to act until he should give permission, holding that no public 
punishment should be inflicted until he should be officially noti- 
fied of the sentence. There were hasty conferences and debates, 
lasting to nearly midnight, and it was not until 7 a.m. of the 30th 
that the marquis gave way and the sentence was executed. 
The tribunal reported the affair to the Suprema, which replied 
in the name of the king, diplomatically thanking the marquis 
and rebuking his legal adviser, who was told that it was his duty 
and that of all officials to be obedient to the Inquisition.’ 

As a perpetual reminder of this subordination, there appears 
to have been kept in the royal chancillery the formula of a letter 
addressed to all viceroys and captains-general. This recited 
the invaluable services of the Inquisition in clearing the land of 
infinite heretics and preserving it from the convulsions afflicting 
other nations, thus rendering its efficiency one of the chief 
concerns of the crown. Therefore the king charges his represen- 
tatives emphatically to honor and favor all inquisitors, officials 
and familiars, giving them all the necessary aid for which they 
may ask and enforcing the observance of all the privileges and 
exemptions conceded to them by law, concordias, royal cédulas, 
use and custom and in any other way, so that the Holy Office 
may have the full liberty and authority which it has always 
enjoyed and which the king desires it to retain. A copy of this 
was sent to all the viceroysin 1603 and, as I have chanced to find 
it again addressed, in 1652, to the Duke of Montalto, then Viceroy 
of Valencia, it was presumably part of the regular instructions fur- 
nished to all who were appointed to these responsible positions.” 


In the interminable conflicts through which the Inquisition 
established its enjoyment of the powers thus conferred, the 


* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Sala 39, Leg. 4, fol. 41. 

? Portocarrero, op. cit., 2 1.—Solorzani de Indiar. Gubern., Lib. m1, cap. xxiv, 
n. 16.—Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 1, Lib. 3, fol. 
49-69. 


Cuap. II] POWER TO CRIPPLE OPPONENTS 355 


inquisitor was armed, offensively and defensively, in a manner 
to give him every advantage. He could, at any moment, when 
involved in a struggle with either the secular or ecclesiastical 
authorities, disable his opponent with a sentence of excom- 
munication removable only by the Holy Office or the pope 
and, if this did not suffice, he could lay an interdict or even a 
cessatio a divinis on cities, until the people, deprived of the 
sacraments, would compel submission. It is true that, in 1533, 
the Suprema ordered that much discretion should be exercised 
in the use of this powerful weapon, on account of the indignation 
aroused by its abuse, but we shall have ample opportunity to 
see how recklessly it was employed habitually, without regard 
to the preliminary safeguards imposed by the canons.’ On the 
other hand, the inquisitor was practically immune. His antago- 
nists were mostly secular authorities who had no such weapon 
in their armories and, when he chanced to quarrel with a prelate, 
he usually took care to be the first to fulminate an excommuni- 
cation, and then unconcernedly disregarded the counter censures 
as uttered by one disabled from the exercise of his functions, for 
the anathema deprived its subject of all official faculties. It 
had the contingent result, moreover, that he who remained under 
excommunication for a year could be prosecuted for suspicion of 
heresy.’ 

There was another provision which rendered it even more 
formidable as an antagonist. In matters of faith and all per- 
taining directly or indirectly thereto, its jurisdiction was ex- 
clusive. In the extensive field of civil and criminal business, of 
which it obtained cognizance through the immunities of its 
officials and, in the frequent quarrels arising from questions 
of ceremony and precedence, no court, whether secular or 
spiritual, had power to inhibit any action which it might see 
fit to take. By special papal favor, however, it had power to 
inhibit their action and thus to cripple them on the spot. This 
extraordinary privilege, with power to subdelegate, appears to 
have been first granted in the commissions issued, in 1507, to 
Ximenes and Enguera as inquisitors-general respectively of 
Castile and Aragon and was repeated in those of Luis Mercader 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Libro 939, fol. 63.—Cf. Concil. Trident. Sess. xxv, De 
Reform. cap. 3.—Ferraris, Prompta Bibliotheca, s. v. Excom. Art. 5, n. 17. 
2 C. Trident. ubi sup. 


356 SUPEREMINENCE [Boox II 


and Pedro Juan Poul in 1513... For a considerable time this 
clause disappears from the commissions, but, towards the close 
of the century, it again finds place, in a more detailed and abso- 
lute form in that granted to Manrique de Lara, after which it 
continued in those of his successors to the end. It confers the 
power of inhibiting all judges, even of archiepiscopal dignity, 
under pecuniary penalties and censures to be enforced by the 
invocation of the secular arm and of absolving them after they 
shall have submitted and obeyed.” This proclaimed to the world 
that the Inquisition outranked all other authorities in Church 
and State and the power was too often exercised for its existence 
to be ignored or forgotten. This superiority found practical 
expression in the rule that, in the innumerable conflicts of juris- 
diction, all secular and ecclesiastical judges must answer com- 
munications from inquisitors in the form of petition and not by 
letter. If they replied to commands and comminations by letter 
they were to be fined and proceedings were to be commenced 
against them and their messengers, and they were required’ to 
withdraw and erase from their records all such letters which 
were held to be disrespectful to the superiority of the Holy 
Office.® 

It was an inevitable inference from this that there was no 
direct appeal from whatever a tribunal might do except to the 
Suprema, which, though it might in secret chide its subordinates 
for their excesses, customarily upheld them before the world. 
The sovereign, it is true, was the ultimate judge and, in occasional 
cases, he interposed his authority with more or less effect, but 
the ordinary process was through a competencia, a cumbrous 


? Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Libro I de copias, fol. 10, 18, 15.—“ Et 
quibuscunque judicibus et personis quibus tibi inhibendum videbitur etiam sub 
censuris et privationis et inhabilitatis poenis inhibendi.”’ 

? Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Libro IV, fol. 118, 137; Libro V, fol. 117, 
136, 138, 151, 199, 200, 251, 264, 295.—Archivo de Simancas, Gracia y Justicia, 
Leg. 629. 

This clause probably explains a peculiarity in the issue of Manrique de Lara’s 
commission. After the death of Quiroga, Nov. 20, 1594, Clement VIII issued to 
Manrique, Feb. 10, 1595, a commission subrogating him to Quiroga, with the 
same powers, for six months until further letters could be made out. Then, 
August 1, 1595, the full elaborate commission is made out, containing this clause 
(Bulario, loc. cit., 118, 119). The new clause must have evoked prolonged debate, 
requiring five months for its settlement. 

3 MSS. of Royal Library of Copenhagen, 218», p. 338. 


Cuap. IT] ASSERTION OF SUPERIORITY 357 


procedure through which, as we shall see, the Inquisition could 
wrangle for years and virtually, in most cases, deny all practical 
relief to the sufferers. 

Another weapon of tremendous efficacy was the power of 
arrest, possessed at will by inquisitors during the greater portion 
of the career of the Inquisition. Even to gratify mere vindict- 
iveness, by simply asserting that there was a matter of faith, 
the inquisitor could throw any one into the secret prison. The 
civil magistrate might thus abuse his authority with little 
damage to the victim, but it was otherwise with the Inquisition. 
In the insane estimate placed on limpieza de sangre, or purity 
of blood, the career of a man and of his descendants was fatally 
narrowed by such a stain on his orthodoxy; it mattered little 
what was the outcome of the case, the fact of imprisonment 
was remembered and handed down through generations while 
the fact of its being causeless was forgotten. In the later period, 
when the Suprema supervised every act of the tribunals, the 
opportunities for this were greatly restricted, but during the 
more active times the ill-will of an inquisitor could at any mo- 
ment inflict this most serious injury and the power was often 
recklessly abused in the perpetual conflicts with the secular 
authorities. The ability thus to destroy at a word the pros- 
pects in life of any man was a terrible weapon which goes far 
to explain the awe with which the inquisitor was regarded by 
the community. 

That the inquisitor should assume to be superior to all other 
dignitaries was the natural result of the powers thus concen- 
trated in him. Paédramo asserts that he is the individual of 
highest authority in his district, as he represents both pope and 
king; and the Suprema, in a consulta addressed to Philip V, in 
1713, boasted that its jurisdiction was so superior that there 
was not a person in the kingdom exempt from it... The haughty 
supremacy which it affected is seen in instructions issued in 
1578 that inquisitors, when the tribunal is sitting, are not to 
go forth to receive any one, save the king, the queen or a royal 
prince and are not, in an official capacity, to appear in recep- 
tions of prelates or other public assemblies, and this was virtually 
repeated in 1645, when they were told not to visit the viceroy 


_1 P4ramo, p. 5387.—MSS. of Library of Univ. of Halle, Yc, Tom. 17. 


308 SUPEREMINENCE [Boox II 


or the archbishop or accept their invitations, for such demon- 
strations were due only to the person of the king.*. Exception, 
however, was probably taken to this for a carta acordada of 
March 17, 1648, lays down less stringent rules and specifies for 
each tribunal, according to the varying customs of different 
places, the high officials whom the inquisitor is permitted to 
visit on induction into office and on occasions of condolence 
or congratulation.’ 

In the social hierarchy the viceroys and captains-general 
stood next to the king as representing, in their respective 
governments, the royal person. To outrank these exalted per- 
sonages was not beyond inquisitorial ambition. In 1588 there 
was great scandal in Lima, when the inquisitors claimed pre- 
cedence over the Count of Villar, the Viceroy of Peru, and 
carried their point by excommunicating him, but Philip I, 
in a cédula of March 8, 1589, took them severely to task for their 
arrogance and added that the viceroy was equally to blame 
for yielding, as he represented the royal power. ‘This lesson 
was ineffectual and some years later another method was tried 
of asserting superiority. In 1596, the Captain-general of Aragon 
complained to the king that, in the recent auto de fe, the inquisi- 
tors had refused to give him the title of Excellency. To this 
Philip rephed, February 6, 1597, that it was unreasonable for 
them thus to affect equality with his personal representative; 
they must either concede to him the title of Excellency or them- 
selves be treated as vuestra merced, in place of muy dlustres 
or senoria, and therefore he could attend the next auto.’ 

This asserted superiority of the Inquisition was very galling 
to the bishops, who argued that the Holy Office had been founded 
only four hundred years before, as an aid to their jurisdiction, 
and they resented bitterly the efforts of the resolute upstarts 
to claim higher privileges and precedence. The Inquisition, how- 
ever, was an organized whole, with sharp and unsparing methods 


* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 939, fol. 65; Libro 941, fol. 5; Libro 
71, fol. 143.—MSS. of Royal Library of Copenhagen, 218», p. 300.—MSS of Bibl. 
nacional de Lima, Protocolo 223, Expediente 5270. 

* MSS. of Royal Library of Copenhagen, 318, p. 302.—Bibl. nacional, Seccion 
de MSS., D, 118, fol. 170. 

* Solorzano, De Gubernatione Indiarum, Lib. m1, Tit. xxiv, n. 53.—MSS. of 
Bibl. nacional de Lima, Protocolo 228, Expediente 5287.—Archivo de Simancas, 
Inquisicion, Legajo 1465, fol. 63. 


Cuap. IT] ASSERTION OF SUPERIORITY 359 


of enforcing its claims and protected in every way from assault, 
while the episcopate was a scattered and unwieldy body, acting 
individually and, for the most part, powerless to defend the 
officials, through whom it acted, from those who claimed that 
everything concerning themselves was a matter of faith of which 
they had exclusive cognizance. The serious conflicts over juris- 
diction will be considered in a subsequent chapter; here we are 
concerned merely with questions of etiquette and ceremonial. 
Seen through the perspective of the centuries, these quarrels, 
which were conducted with frantic eagerness, seem trivialities. 
unworthy of record, but their significance was momentous to the 
parties concerned, as they involved superiority and inferiority. 
The hundred years’ quarrel over precedence in Rome, between 
the ambassadors of France and Spain, which was not settled 
until 1661 by the triumph of France, had a meaning beyond 
a mere question of ceremony. In Spain these debates often filled 
the land with confusion. All parties were tenacious of what they 
conceived to be their rights and were ready to explode in violence 
on the smallest provocation. The enormous mass of letters: 
and papers concerning the seats and positions of the inquisitors. 
and their officials at all public functions—whether seats should 
be chairs or benches and whether they were to have canopies,. 
or cushions, or carpets, shows that these were regarded as matters. 
of the highest moment, giving rise to envenomed quarrels with 
the ecclesiastical and secular dignitaries, requiring for their 
settlement the interposition of the royal authority. The inquisi- 
tors were constantly arrogating to themselves external marks 
of superiority and the others were disputing it with a vehemence 
that elevated the most trivial affairs into matters of national 
importance, and the attention of the king and the highest minis- 
ters was diverted from affairs of state to pacify obscure quarrels 
in every corner of the land. 

It would be futile to enter into the details of these multi- 
tudinous squabbles, but one or two subjects in dispute may be 
mentioned to illustrate the ingenuity with which the Inquisition 
pushed its claims to superiority. Towards the middle of the 
seventeenth century it demanded that, when there was an epis- 
copal letter or mandate to be published in the churches and also 
an edict or letter of the Inquisition, the latter should have 
precedence in the reading. This was naturally regarded as an 
effort to show that the inquisitorial jurisdiction was superior to 


360 SUPEREMINENCE [Boor II 


the episcopal and it led to frequent scandals. In 1645, at Valen- 
cia, on Passion Sunday, a secretary of the tribunal endeavored 
to read letters of the inquisitors before one of the archbishop’s, 
but, by the latter’s order, the priest refused to give way, where- 
upon the inquisitors arrested him: the matter was carried up to 
to the king, who ordered the priest to be discharged in such wise 
that there should be no record of his prosecution and that his 
good fame should be restored. Soon after this, in Saragossa, 
on a feast-day in the cathedral, a priest commenced to read an ‘ 
archiepiscopal letter, but before he had finished more than a 
few lines, a secretary of the Inquisition mounted the other pulpit 
and began reading a letter of the Inquisition; the priest was so 
disturbed that he stopped, whereupon the archbishop, Juan 
Cebrian, ordered his arrest, but he pleaded his surprise and 
confusion and the archbishop relented. In 1649 a more deter- 
mined effort was made by the Saragossa tribunal. August 15th 
the parish priest of the cathedral read certain archiepiscopal 
letters at the accustomed time and was followed by the secretary 
of the Inquisition with others of the inquisitors. Two days 
later the priest was summoned before the tribunal and was made 
to swear secrecy as to orders given to him. The result showed 
what were his instructions, for the next Sunday, having archi- 
episcopal letters to read, he waited until the secretary read those 
of the inquisitors. Some days later similar secret orders were 
given to the priest of Nuestra Sefiora del Pilar and when, on 
October 11th, he commenced reading an archiepiscopal letter, 
an officer of the Inquisition seized him by the arm and forced 
him to read first those of the tribunal. Archbishop Cebrian 
addressed memorials to the king, September 7th and 21st and 
October 12th asking his protection to preserve the archiepiscopal 
jurisdiction; the Council of Aragon presented a consulta sup- 
porting him, on which the wearied monarch made an endorse- 
ment, deploring the evil results of such conflicts and telling the 
Council to write to the archbishop not to proceed to extremities 
but to seek some adjustment similar to that by which, a short 
time before, Cardinal Moscoso in Toledo had caused an inquisi- 
torial letter to be read on a different day, to which the tribunal 
must be made to conform.’ 

The persistence with which the Inquisition maintained any 


1 Archivo gén. de la C. de Aragon, Leg. 528, n. 2. 


Cuap. IT] ASSERTION OF SUPERIORITY 361 


claim once advanced is illustrated by its endeavor to introduce 
a change in the ritual of the mass favorable to its assumption 
of superiority. It was the custom that the celebrant should 
make a bow to the bishop, if present, and in his absence, to the 
Eucharist. In 1635, at Valladolid, the inquisitors required that 
when the Edict of Faith was read the bow should be made to 
them and, on the refusal of the officiating canon, they arrested 
him and the dean who upheld him and held them under heavy 
bail. This aroused the whole city and brought a rebuke from 
_ the king, who ordered them to discharge the bai! and not to 
abuse their jurisdiction. Unabashed by this the effort was made 
again at Compostella, in 1639, and duly resisted; the king was 
again obliged to examine the question and, after consultation 
with learned men, decided that the chapter was in the right and 
that the inquisitors had the alternative of absenting themselves 
from the reading. Two rebuffs such as this should have sufficed 
but, in 1643, after careful preparation, another attempt was 
made at Cordova, which produced a fearful scandal. Neither 
side would yield; the services were interrupted; the inquisitors 
endeavored to excommunicate the canons, but the latter raised 
such a din with howls and cries, the thunder of the organ, the 
clangor of bells and breaking up the seats in the choir, that the 
fulmination could not be heard. Even the inquisitors shrank 
from the storm and left the church amid hisses, with their caps 
pulled down to their eyes, but they lost no time in commencing 
a prosecution of the canons, who appealed to the king, in a por- 
tentous document covering two hundred and fifty-six folio pages. 
Philip and his advisers at the moment had ample occupation, 
what with the dismissal of Olivares, the evil tidings from Rocroy 
and the rebellions in Catalonia and Portugal, but they had to 
turn aside to settle this portentous quarrel. A royal letter of 
June 16, 1643, ordered the inquisitors to restore to the canons 
certain properties which they had seized and to remove the 
excommunications, while reference to similar decisions at Com- 
postella, Granada and Cartagena shows how obstinate and 
repeated had been the effort of the Holy Office. Notwithstanding 
this the tribunal of Cérdova refused obedience to the royal 
mandate and a second letter, of September 28th from Saragossa, 
where Philip was directing the campaign against Catalonia, was 
required. This was couched in peremptory terms; the excom- 
munications must be removed and, for the future, the Roman 


362 SUPEREMINENCE [Boox If 


ceremonial must be observed, prescribing that in the absence of 
the bishop, the reverence must be made to the sacrament.’ 

While thus steadily endeavoring to encroach on the rights 
of others, the Inquisition was supersensitive as to anything 
that might be reckoned as an attempt by other bodies to assert 
superiority, and it vindicated what it held to be its rights with 
customary violence. When the funeral solemnities of Queen Ana 
of Austria were celebrated in Seville, in 1580, a bitter quarrel 
about precedence in seats arose between the tribunal, the royal 
Audiencia or high court and the city authorities, when the former 
arbitrarily suspended the obsequies until consultation could be 
had with Philip II, then in Lisbon, engaged in the absorption 
of Portugal. He regulated the position which each of the con- 
tending parties should occupy and the postponed honors were 
duly rendered. Matters remained quiescent until a similar 
function became necessary, after the death of Philip in 1598. 
The city spent weeks in costly preparations and the catafalque 
erected in the cathedral was regarded as worthy of that magnifi- 
cent building. November 29th was fixed for the ceremonies; 
on the vigil, the regent, or president judge of the Audiencia, 
sent a chair from his house to the place assigned to him, but the 
chapter protested so vigorously against the innovation that he 
was obliged to remove it. The following morning, when the 
various bodies entered the church at half-past nine, the benches 
assigned to the judges and their wives were seen to be draped 
in mourning. This was at once regarded as an effort on their 
part to establish pre-eminence and excited great indignation. 
The services commenced and during the mass the inquisitors sent 
word to the cabildo, or city magistracy, that it should order the 
mourning removed. After some demur, the cabildo sent its 
procurador mayor, Pedro de Escobar, with a notary and some 
alguaziles to the Audiencia, bearing a message to the effect that 
if the drapery were not removed, the inquisitors and the church 
authorities were agreed that the ceremonies should be suspended. 
He was told not to approach and on persisting he and his followers 
were arrested and thrown into the public gaol. The inquisitors 
then sent their secretary with a message, but he too was kept at a 


1 MSS. of Bodleian Library, Arch. S, 130.—Cartas de Jesuitas (Memorial hist. 
espafiol, XVII, 70-75).—Juan Gomez Bravo, Catdlogo de los Obispos de Cérdova, 
p. 643. 


Cuap. IT] QUESTIONS OF CEREMONY 363 


distance, when he mounted the steps of the catafalque and cried 
out that the tribunal excommunicated the three judges, Vallejo, 
Lorenzana and Guerra, if they did not depart. A second time 
he came with a message, which he was not allowed to deliver, 
and again he mounted the steps to declare all the judges excom- 
municated and that they must leave the church in order that 
the services might proceed, for the presence of excommunicates 
was a bar to all public worship. This was repeated again by the 
fiscal, when the Audiencia drew up a paper declaring the acts of 
the tribunal to be null and void and ordering it to remove the 
censure under pain of forfeiting citizenship and temporalities, 
but the scrivener sent to serve it was refused a hearing and 
on his persisting was threatened with the pillory. The alcalde 
of the city endeavored to calm the inquisitors, but Inquisitor 
Zapata replied furiously that if St. Paul came from heaven and 
ordered them to do otherwise they would refuse if it cost them 
their souls. 

Meanwhile there were similar trouble and complications among 
the church authorities. The vicar-general, Pedro Ramirez de 
Leon, ordered the services resumed, under pain, for the dean 
and officiating priest, of excommunication and of a thousand 
ducats; the precentor and canons appealed to the pope, but the 
vicar-general published them in the choir as excommunicates. 
The celebrant, Dr. Negron, was sought for, but he had prudently 
disappeared in the confusion and could not be found. It was 
now half-past twelve and the canons sent word to the Audiencia. 
that they were going and it could go. To leave the church, 
however, would seem like an admission by the judges that they 
were excommunicate and they grimly kept their seats. The 
cabildo of the city and the tribunal were not to be outdone and 
the three hostile groups sat glaring at each other until four 
o’clock, when the absurdity of the situation grew too strong 
and they silently departed. Meanwhile the candles had been 
burning until five hundred ducats’ worth of wax was uselessly 
consumed. 

So complicated a quarrel could of course only be straightened 
out by the king to whom all parties promptly appealed. The 
judges proved that they had not draped their benches as a sign 
of pre-eminence but had proposed that the same be done by the 
cabildo and the tribunal. As far as regards the latter, the royal 
decision was manifested in two cédulas of December 22d. One 


364 SUPEREMINENCE [Boox II 


of these told the inquisitors that they had exceeded their 
jurisdiction in excommunicating the judges, whom they were to 
absolve ad cautelam and they also had to pay for the wasted 
wax. The other ominously ordered the inquisitors Blanco and 
Zapata to appear at the court within fifteen days and not to 
depart without licence. At the same time, on December 21st the 
suspended obsequies were duly celebrated.* 

It will be seen from these cases that the only appeal from 
inquisitorial aggression lay to the king and that, even when the 
inquisitors were wholly in the wrong and the royal decision was 
against them, no steps were taken to keep them within bounds 
for the future. The altered position of the Holy Office under 
the Bourbons was therefore significantly indicated by a decision 
of Fernando VI in 1747. At the celebration in Granada, on Sep- 
tember 11th, of his accession, the chancilleria, or great high 
court of New Castile, observed that the archbishop occupied a 
chair covered with taffety, outside of his window overlooking 
the plaza, and that the inquisitors had cushions on their window- 
sills. It sent messengers to request the removal of these symbols 
of pre-eminence and, on receiving a refusal in terms of scant 
respect, it stopped the second bull-fight and put an end to the 
ceremonies. The matter was referred to the king, when the 
Suprema, in a memorial of solemn earnestness, argued that the 
Inquisition had for centuries been in the uncontested enjoy- 
ment of the privilege of which it was now sought to be deprived. 
It was the highest tribunal, not only in Spain but in the world, 
as it had charge of the true religion, which is the foundation of 
all kingdoms and republics. The time had passed for this swell- 
ing self-assertion. Full discussion was devoted to the momen- 
tous question and, on October 3d, Fernando issued a decree 
which proclaimed to Spain that the Holy Office was no longer 
what it had been. This was to the effect that, as the chancil- 
leria represented the royal jurisdiction, and thus indirectly the 
king himself, it was entitled to pre-eminence in all such celebra- 
tions and in those of the royal chapel; it was justified in its 
action and thereafter nosuch signs of dignity as canopies, cushions, 
ceremonial chairs and the like should be used in its presence. In 
case of attempts to do so, one of the alcaldes del crimen with 


‘ Arifio, Sucesos de Sevilla, pp. 103, 105; Appendix (Sevilla, 1873).—Archivo 
de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 937, fol. 220. 


Cuap. IT] SUPERIORITY TO LAW 365 


his officers should remove them and punish any workmen 
engaged in setting them up.’ 


The Inquisition and its members were protected in every 
way from subjection to local laws and regulations. An edict of 
Charles V, in 1523, forbade all municipalities or other bodies 
from adopting statutes which should in any way curtail their 
privileges or be adverse to them and, if any such should be 
attempted he declared them in advance to be null and void. 
This, in fact, was only expressing and enforcing the canon laws 
enacted in the frenzied efforts to suppress heresy in the thirteenth 
century and still in vigor. A constitution of Urban IV (1261-5) 
declares invalid the laws of any state or city which impede, 
directly or indirectly, the functions of the Inquisition, and the 
bishop or inquisitor is empowered to summon the ruler or magis- 
trates to exhibit such statutes and compel him by censures to 
revoke or modify them.’ While this was designed to prevent 
the crippling of the Inquisition by hostile legislation, it inferred 
a superiority to law and was construed in the most liberal way, 
as was seen in a struggle in Valencia which lasted for nearly two 
centuries. A police regulation for the improvement of the 
market-place ordered the removal of all stands for the display of 
goods under the arcades of the houses. One house belonged to 
the tribunal; its tenant was the worst offender, and he obsti- 
nately kept his stand and appealed to the tribunal for protection 
against the law. This protection was accorded with such vigor 
in 1603, that the saintly Archbishop, Juan de Ribera, who was 
also captain-general, vainly endeavored to secure obedience to 
the law. Until the close of the eighteenth century the tribunal 
thus successfully defied the Real Junta de Policia, consisting 
of the captain-general, the regente and other high officials. At 
length, in 1783, Carlos III issued a royal declaration that no one 
should be exempt from obedience to orders of police and good 
government and that all such cases should be adjudicated by 
the ordinary courts without admitting the competencias with 
which the Holy Office habitually sought to tire out those who 
ventured to withstand its aggressiveness. Under this, in 1791, 
the nuisance in Valencia was abated, when the tribunal apolo- 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Leg. 1465, fol. 46.—Archivo de Alcald4, 
Hacienda, Leg. 544?, Libro 8. 
? Portocarrero, op. cit., 3 57. 3 Cap. 9 in Sexto, Lib. v, Tit. ii. 


366 SUPEREMINENCE [Boox II 


gized to the Suprema for yielding and excused itself in virtue 
of the royal declaration of 1783. It had held out as long as it 
could, but times had changed and even the Inquisition was forced 
to respect the law. Madrid had been earlier relieved from such 
annoyance, for a royal cédula of 1746, regulating the police 
system of the capital, has a clause evidently directed at the 
Inquisition for it declares that no exemption, even the most 
privileged, shall avail in matters concerning the police, the 
adornment and the cleanliness of the city.’ 

The lawlessness thus fostered degenerated into an arbitrary dis- 
regard of the rights of others, leading to a petty tyranny some- 
times exercised in the most arbitrary and capricious manner. 
Inquisitor Santos of Saragossa was very friendly with the Licen- 
ciado Pedro de Sola, a beneficed priest of the cathedral, and 
Juan Sebastian, who were good musicians and who gathered some 
musical friends to sing complins with them on Holy Saturday at. 
Santa Engracia, where the inquisitors spent Holy Week in 
retreat. Santos used to send his coach for them and entertain 
them handsomely, but when, in 1624, he became Bishop of 
Solsona, although the singing continued, the coach and enter- 
tainment ceased and the musicians went unwillingly. Finally, 
in 1637, some of them stopped going; the inquisitors sent for 
them and scolded them which made them all indignant. Then, 
in 1638, the secretary Heredia was sent to order them to go and 
when the chapel-master excused them, with an intimation that. 
they ought to be paid, Heredia told them the tribunal honored 
them sufficiently in calling for them. They did not go and, 
when Haster was over, two of them, beneficed priests, were 
summoned and, after being kept waiting for three hours, were 
imprisoned in a filthy little house occupied by soldiers and were 
left for twelve hours without bedding, food or drink. The next 
day they managed to communicate with the chapter, but it 
was afraid to interfere and, after six days of this confinement, 
they were brought before the tribunal and informed that they 
had the city for a prison, under pain of a hundred ducats, and 
were made to swear to present themselves whenever summoned. 
As they went out they saw two more brought in—the chapel- 
master and a priest. At last the chapter plucked up courage 


* Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 4, n. 3, fol. 25.—Archivo: 
de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 688, fol. 289. 
? MS. penes me. 


Cap. IT] INVIOLABILITY 367 


to address a memorial to the king through the Council of Aragon, 
which added the suggestion that he should order the inquisitor- 
general to see to the release of the musicians and the prevention 
of such extortion. May 11th Philip referred this to the Suprema 
which, after a month’s delay, replied, June 14th, that, desiring 
to avoid controversy with the church of Saragossa, it had ordered 
the tribunal to pay the musicians in future, to release any that 
were in prison and to return whatever fines had been imposed.t 
When petty tyranny such as this could be practised, especially 
on the privileged class of priests, we can appreciate the terrorism 
surrounding the tribunals. 


Another distinction contributed to the supereminence claimed 
by the Inquisition—the inviolability which shielded all who 
were in its service. From an early period the Church had sought 
to protect its members, whose profession was assumed to debar 
them from the use of arms, by investing them with a sanctity 
which should assure their safety in an age of violence. Through- 
out the middle ages no canon was more frequently invoked than 
Si quis suadente diabolo, which provided that whoever struck a 
cleric or monk incurred an anathema removable only by personal 
appearance before the pope and accepting his sentence.” More 
than this was asked for by the Inquisition, for the greater portion 
of its officials were laymen. ‘They were no more exposed to 
injury or insult than those of the secular courts, but it was 
assumed that there was a peculiar hatred felt for them and that 
their functions in defending the faith entitled them to special 
security. We shall see hereafter that the Inquisition obtained 
jurisdiction in all matters connected with its officials, but this, 
while enabling it to give them special protection, had the limita- 
tion that judgements of blood rendered ecclesiastics pronouncing 
them “‘irregular.”” In cases of heresy this had long been evaded | 
by a hypocritical plea for mercy, when delivering convicts to 
the secular arm for execution, but it was felt that some special 
faculties were requisite in dealing with cases of mere assault or 
homicide and a motu proprio was procured from Leo X, January 
28, 1515, empowering inquisitors to arrest any one, even of the 
highest rank, whether lay or clerical, who strikes, beats, mutilates 


1 Archivo gén. de la C. de Aragon, Leg. 528, n. 23.—Archivo de Simancas, 
Inquisicion, Libro 21, fol. 140. 
? Gratiani Decreti P. II, Caus. xvit, Q, Iv, ¢c. 29. 


368 SUPEREMINENCE [Boox II 


or kills any minister or official of the Inquisition and to deliver 
him to the secular arm for punishment, without incurring irregu- 
larity, even if it results in effusion of blood.’ The Holy Office 
thus held in its own hands the protection of all who served it. 

This was rendered still more efficient by subsequent papal 
action. Irritated at some resistance offered to the Roman 
Inquisition, Pius V published, April 1, 1569, the ferocious bull 
Si de protegendis, under which any one, of whatever rank, who 
should threaten, strike or kill an officer or a witness, who should 
help a prisoner to escape or make way with any document, or 
should lend aid or counsel to such act, was to be delivered to the 
secular judge for punishment as a heretic—that is to say, for 
burning—including confiscation and the infamy of his children.’ 
Although this was intended for Italy, the Spanish Inquisition 
speedily assumed the benefit of it; it was sent out October 16th 
and it was annually published in the vernacular on Holy Thurs- 
day.® 

Thus all concerned in the business of the Holy Office were 
hedged around with an inviolability accorded to no other class 
of the community. The inquisitors themselves were additionally 
protected against responsibility for their own malfeasance by 
the received theory that scandal was more to be dreaded than 
crime—that there was inherent in their office such importance 
to religion that anything was better than what might bring that 
office into contempt. Francisco Pefia, in treating of this, quotes 
the warning of Aquinas as to cardinals and applies it to the 


1 Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Libro I de copias, fol. 139.—Archivo de 
Alcal4é, Hacienda, Legajo 1049. 

For some reason a similar brief was obtained from Paul V, November 29, 1606. 
—Archivo de Alcala, loc. cit. 

2 Bullar. Roman. II, 198. 

This was by no means allowed to be a dead letter in Italy. In 1590 we chance 
to hear of the Inquisitor of Cremona relaxing to the secular arm three offenders 
under the bull. In some cases however of wounding or threatening witnesses, 
the galleys were substituted for capital punishment. There was, moreover, a 
spirit of conciliation in the Roman Inquisition offering a marked contrast to that 
of Spain. When, in 1635, at Macerata, some laymen were arrested for wounding 
certain officials of the tribunal and a question arose as to jurisdiction, the Con- 
gregation ordered the civil governor to try the cases as its delegate and not to 
apply the bull Si de protegendis, as the wounding had not arisen out of hostility 
to the Holy Office.—Decreta Sacr. Congr. Sti Officii, pp. 34, 202 (R. Archivio 
di Stato in Roma, Fondo Camerale, Congr. del S. Offizio, Vol. 3). 

8 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 939, fol. 144. 


Cuap. IT] INVIOLABILITY 369 


punishment of inquisitors; if scandal has arisen, they may be 
punished; otherwise the danger to the reputation of the Holy 
Office is greater than that of impunity to the offender.’ The 
tenderness, in fact, with which they were treated, even when 
scandal had arisen, was a scandal in itself. Thus, when the 
reiterated complaints of Barcelona caused a visitation to be made 
there, in 1567, by de Soto Salazar, and his report confirmed 
the accusations, showing the three inquisitors to be corrupt, 
extortionate and unjust, the only penalty imposed, in 1568, was 
merely suspension for three years from all office in the Inquisi- 
tion. Even this was not enforced, at least with regard to one of 
them, Dr. Zurita, for we chance to meet him as inquisitor of 
Saragossa in 1570. He does not seem to have reformed, for his 
transfer thence to Sardinia, the least desirable of the tribunals, 
can only have been in consequence of persistent misconduct.” 
The tribunals naturally showed the same mercy to their sub- 
ordinates, whose sole judges they were, and this retention in 
office of those whom unfitness was proved was not the least of 
the burdens with which the Inquisition afflicted Spain. 

What rendered this inviolability more aggravating was that 
it extended to the servants and slaves of all connected with the 
Holy Office. About 1540 a deputy corregidor of Murcia, for 
insulting a servant of the messenger of the tribunal, was exposed 
to the infamy of hearing mass as a penitent.’ In 1564, we 
find Dr. Zurita, on circuit through his district, collecting evidence 
against Micael Bonet, of Palacio de Vicio, for caning a servant 
boy of Benet Modaguer, who held some office in the Inquisition, 
and the case was sent to Barcelona for trial, which shows that it 
was regarded as serious. So, in 1568, for quarrelling with a 
servant of Micer Complada, who styled himself deputy of the 
abogado fiscal at Tarragona, the Barcelona tribunal, without 
verifying Complada’s claims to office, threw into prison Gerénimo 
Zapata and Antonio de Urgel and condemned Zapata to a fine 
of thirty ducats and six months’ exile and Urgel to ten ducats 
and three months.* In Murcia, Sebastian Gallego, the servant 
of an inquisitor, quarrelled with a butcher over some meat, when 


1 Pegne Comment. lxi in Eymerici Direct. Inquis. P. m1. 
2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Visitas de Barcelona, Leg. 15, fol. 20; 
Ibidem, Libro 940, fol. 45.—Bibl. nacional, Seccion de MSS., P V, 3, n. 69. 
3 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 925, fol. 681. 
4 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Visitas de Barcelona, Leg. 15, fol. 9 
24 


S10 SUPEREMINENCE [Boox II 


they exchanged insults. The secular judge arrested both, but 
the tribunal claimed them, prosecuted the butcher and banished 
him from the town.’ Such cases were of frequent occurrence 
and it is easy to conceive how galling was the insolence of a 
despised class thus enabled to repay the contempt with which 
it was habitually treated. 

When the honor of slaves was thus vindicated inquisitors were 
not apt to condone any failure, real or imaginary, in the respect 
which they held to be their due, and the offender was made to 
feel the awful authority which shrouded the tribunal and its 
judges. As their powers were largely discretional, with unde- 
fined limits, the manner in which they were exercised was some- 
times eccentric. In 1569, for instance, the Jesuits of Palermo 
prepared for representation in their church a tragedy of St. 
Catherine and, on October 4th, they gave a private rehearsal 
to which were invited the viceroy and principal dignitaries. 
The inquisitor, Juan Biserra, came as one of the guests and 
finding the door closed knocked repeatedly without announcing 
himself or demanding admittance. The janitor, thinking it to 
be some unauthorized person, paid no attention to the knocking 
and Biserra departed, highly incensed. When the Jesuits heard of 
it, the rector and principal fathers called on him to apologize, 
but, after keeping them waiting for some time he refused to see 
them. The public representation was announced for October 
8th; the church was crowded with the nobility awaiting the 
rising of the curtain, when a messenger from Biserra notified 
the Jesuits that he forbade the performance, under pain of 
excommunication and other penalties at his discretion, until 
after the piece should have been examined and approved by 
him. The audience was dismissed and the next day the MS. 
was sent to Biserra who submitted it to Dominican censors. 
Although they returned it with their approval he discovered in 
it two objectionable points, so absurdly trifling as to show that 
he wanted merely to make a wanton exhibition of his power. 
The censors replied to his criticism and he finally allowed the 
performance to proceed. We may not unreasonably assume that 
this may have been one of the freaks for which Biserra was 
suspended in 1572, on the report made of him by the visitor 
Quintanilla. Then, with customary tenderness, he was employed 


1 Archivo de Simaneas, Inquisicion, Libro 940, fol. 190. 


Cuap. IT] ENFORCEMENT OF RESPECT Stl 


in the responsible post of visitor at Barcelona, where he died 
soon afterwards.’ , 

The sensitiveness to disrespect and the terrorism which its 
arbitrary punishment diffused through the community were 
well illustrated when, in 1617, Fray Diego Vinegas preached 
the Lenten sermons in the Hospital of N. Sefiora de la Gracia of 
Saragossa. He was a distinguished Benedictine, who had held 
high offices in his Order, and his eloquence on this occasion 
brought in alms amounting to eight thousand crowns. On 
January 21st the inquisitors sent him a message to come to them 
the next day at 2 p.m., to which he replied in writing that he 
was indisposed and closely occupied with his sermons; if they 
wished to order him to preach the Edict of Faith, he held him- 
self already charged to do so and begged them to excuse his 
coming. A second message the same day told him to come at 
the same hour another day, when he would be told what was 
wanted of him, to which he answered that he would come but 
that if it was only to order him to preach the sermon he would 
return at once to Castile, without again mounting the pulpit. 
Whether anything underlay this somewhat mysterious action 
does not appear; the significance of the affair lies in the fact 
that it at once became a matter of general public concern. When 
that same night the governor of the Hospital heard of it he 
recognized the injury that would accrue to the institution and 
to the whole city and forthwith reported it to the viceroy, who 
commissioned the Licentiate Balthasar Navarro to undo the 
mischief. The result of his labors was that the inquisitors 
declared that as Fray Vinegas pleaded indisposition they would 
excuse him from preaching the Edict of Faith. The affair 
appeared to be settled and Vinegas begged permission to call 
on the two inquisitors, Santos and Salcedo, and pay them the 
Easter compliments. They graciously acceded and on Easter 
Monday he waited on them, exculpated himself, and begged 
their pardon for having been prevented by indisposition from 
preaching the Edict, all of which they accepted with great 
courtesy. The community breathed freer, for some vindication 
of the honor of the Inquisition had been expected. The inquis- 
itors however had been consulting the Suprema and vengeance 
was at hand. The next day, Tuesday, was the last of the series 


? Franchina, Breve Rapporto della Inquisizione di Sicilia, pp. 72-5, 93 (Palermo, 
1744). 


372 SUPEREMINENCE [Boox II 


of sermons; Vinegas preached successfully to a crowded church 
when, on descending from the pulpit, he was arrested by an 
alguazil of the Inquisition, dragged through the crowd like a 
heresiarch attempting escape, thrown into a coach and carried 
to the Aljaferfa. There he was placed on a bench like a criminal, 
interrogated as one and then, without being listened to, was 
sentenced to perpetual deprivation of the honors of the Inqui- 
sition (preaching at autos, the edicts, etc.) and reprimanded 
with the utmost severity. The mark of infamy thus inflicted 
was indelible and the scandal was immense. The people flocked 
in crowds to the viceroy in the greatest excitement and he had 
much ado to quiet them by promising that it should be reme- 
died. Vinegas applied for the reinstatement of his honor to 
the Council of Aragon, which replied that it had no jurisdiction; 
then he applied to the Suprema, which refused to hear him. 
He sent a memorial to the king, who referred it to the Council 
of Aragon and he continued his efforts for more than a year 
but it does not appear that he ever obtained relief.’ 

As a rule, any criticism of the justice of the Inquisition and 
any complaint by one who had passed through its hands were 
offences to be punished with more or less severity. To this, 
however, there was an exception in a case the singularity of 
which deserves mention. Perhaps the most distinguished Fran- 
ciscan theologian of his day was Miguel de Medina. He fell 
under suspicion of Lutheranism, was arrested and tried and 
died during trial, May 1, 1578, in the secret prison of Toledo 
after four years of detention. Another Franciscan, Francisco 
Ortiz, espoused his cause so zealously that, in a public sermon 
in 1576 he pronounced the trial to be unjust, for it was the work 
of a conspiracy among his brother frailes; the arrest was a mortal 
sin, as though it were St. Jerome or St. Augustin, and the 
inquisitor-general (Espinosa) who had signed the warrant was 
in hell unless he had repented; the inquisitors were ashamed 
and were seeking to avert the disgrace from themselves, when 
they ought to be punishing the perjury of those who had 
testified. This was flat blasphemy against the Holy Office, and 
it is not easy to understand why the daring fraile escaped, when 
tried by the tribunal of Toledo, with a reprimand administered 
privately in the audience-chamber and a prohibition to enter 


1 Archivo gén. de la C. de Aragon, Leg. 528, n. 3. 


Cuap. II] ENFORCEMENT OF RESPECT ole 


Madrid without permission —a sentence which was duly con- 
firmed by the Suprema.’ We shall see hereafter that another 
Fray Francisco Ortiz, for a similar offence, did not escape so 
easily. 


These were the defences thrown around the Inquisition to 
secure its effectiveness in its supreme function of maintaining 
religious unity, and these were the efforts which it made to secure 
the recognition of the supremacy to which it aspired. It was 
an institution suddenly introduced into an established eccle- 
siastical and secular hierarchy, which regarded the intruder 
with natural jealousy and dislike and resented its manifest 
resolve to use its spiritual authority for their humiliation. Its 
arrogant self-assertion led it into frequent mistakes in which 
even its royal protectors could not justify it, but it gradually 
won its way under the Hapsburgs. The advent of the Bourbons 
brought into play a new theory as to the relations between 
Church and State and the civil authorities were able in time 
to vindicate their equality and independence. We shall have 
the opportunity of following this struggle, in which religion 
was in no way concerned, for the defence of the faith was a 
pretext under which the Holy Office sought to arrogate to itself 
control over a constantly widening area of secular affairs, while 
claiming release from secular obligations. 


1 Nic. Antonii Bibl. nova, II, 140.—Llorente, Hist. erft. Cap. xxrx, Art. 2, 
n. 10.—MSS. of Library of Univ. of Halle, Ye, 20, T. I. 


CAA Pe ena il 


PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS. 


Brrore the Revolution introduced the theory of equality, 
class privileges were the rule. The public burdens were eluded 
by those best able to bear them and were accumulated on the 
toilers. The mortmain lands held by the Church were exempt 
from both taxation and military service and, though Philip V, 
in the Concordat of 1737, obtained the privilege of taxing such 
as might subsequently be acquired, the repeated decrees for its 
enforcement show the impossibility of enforcing it... The com- 
plete immunity of ecclesiastics from taxation was emphatically 
asserted by Boniface VIII in the bull Clericis laicos and, although 
this was revoked by the Council of Vienne in 1312, care was 
taken to enunciate the principle as still in vigor.” Yet in the 
kingdoms of Aragon they were subject to all imposts on sales, 
to import and export dues and other local taxation and, when 
resistance was offered to this, Charles V procured from Adrian 
VI, in 1522, and from Clement VII, in 1524, briefs confirming 
their liability.2 Hidalguia, or gentle blood, conferred a multi- 
plicity of privileges, including exemption from taxation, royal 
and local, with certain exceptions that were largely evaded, 
and the labrador—the peasant or commoner—was distinctively 
known as a pechero or tax-payer.* That in such a social order 
the Inquisition should seek for its members all the exemptions 
that it could grasp was too natural to excite surprise, though it 
might occasionally provoke resistance. 

As regards freedom from taxation, the subject 1s complicated 
by questions concerning royal and local imposts, by the varying 
customs in the different provinces, and by the distinction between 


1 Novis. Recop., Lib. 1, Tit. v, leyes 14, 15. 

? Cap. 3 in Sexto, Lib. m1, Tit. xxiii—Cap. 1 Clementin., Lib. m1, Tit. xvii. 

* Dormer, Afiales de Aragon, pp. 132, 155. 

* For the numerous and extensive privileges of the hidalgo, see Benito de 
Pefialosa y Mondragon, Las Cinco Excelencias del Espafiol, fol. 88 (Barcelona, 
1629). 

(375) 


376 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


the active officials of the tribunals, known as titulados y asalaridos, 
and the more numerous unsalaried ones, who were only called 
upon occasionally for service, such as familiars, commissioners, 
notaries, consultors and censors. ‘Their rights were loosely 
defined and were subject to perpetual variation by conflicting 
decisions in the contests that were constantly occurring with 
the secular authorities, provoked by habitual antagonism and 
the frequent imposition of new taxes, raising new questions. 
Ferdinand wrote sharply, April 18, 1504, to the town-council 
of Barcelona, when it attempted to subject the officials of the 
tribunal to the burdens borne by other citizens, in violation of 
the pre-eminences and exemptions of the Holy Office, and he 
warned them to desist, in view of the judicial measures that 
would be taken. Yet, in 1508, we find him writing still more 
sharply to that tribunal, scolding it because it had taken from 
the house of the alguazil of the Bailfa a female slave and, with- 
out waiting for formal judgement, had sold her without paying 
the royal impost of twenty per cent., a disregard of the regalias 
not permitted to them. They had also issued an order on the 
custom-house to pass free of duty certain articles for an inquisi- 
tor, which was against all rule for, even if the goods were needed 
for the support of the officials, it was a matter for the farmers 
of the revenue to decide, and the issuing of such passes would 
be fruitful of fraud and loss.’ 

These instances indicate the uncertainties of the questions 
that were constantly arising in the intricate system—or lack 
of system—of Spanish taxation. To follow the subject in detail 
would be an endless and unprofitable task. I have collected 
a considerable number of more or less contradictory decisions 
of this early period, but the only deductions to be drawn from 
them are the indefiniteness of the exemption and the earnest- 
ness of the effort made to extend it by the Inquisition. The 
matter evidently was one in which there were no recognized 
rules and, in 1568, Philip II undertook to regulate it, at least 
in so far as concerned royal taxation. He defined for each 
tribunal the officials who were to be exempted from all taxes, 
excise and assessments, and forbade their exaction under pain 
of fifty thousand maravedis and punishment at the royal dis- 


* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Leg. 17, fol. 52.— 
Ibidem, Libro 13, fol. 386. 


Cuap. III] TAXATION 3tt 


cretion, but this exemption was granted only during his good 
pleasure, so that he retained full control and admitted no privi- 
lege as inherent in the Inquisition. His enumeration more- 
over comprised only the titwlados y asalariados, holding com- 
missions from the Suprema and in constant service, and omitted 
the familiars and others who greatly exceeded them in num- 
bers.* 

This attempt at settlement left the matter still undefined 
and provocative of endless strife. It said nothing as to local 
taxes; these and the royal taxes were often indistinguishable, 
or so combined that they could not be separated; the unsalaried 
officials were not specifically declared to be taxable and were 
always striving for exemption, and when, in the growing needs 
of the monarchy, new taxes were imposed, there came ever 
fresh struggles conducted with the customary violence of the 
Inquisition. May 10, 1632, the Royal Council earnestly repre- 
sented to Philip IV that it had already laid before him certain 
excesses of the inquisitors of Cuenca to which he had not seen 
fit to reply. Now the corregidor of Cuenca has reported other 
excesses requiring immediate remedy, for they have issued an 
order, under pain of excommunication and other penalties, that 
the collector of the excise on wine, imposed for the pay of the 
troops, shall not collect it of the salaried officials of the tribunal 
although they are laymen and subject to it. They pretended 
that they were not liable to the alcavala (tax on sales) but they 
were defeated in the suit on this before the Council of Hacienda. 
And if this is permitted all the other tribunals will attempt 
the same, and with their exemption will come that of their 
servants and kindred and connections of all kinds, with frauds 
and concealment as usual, resulting in increase of charge to other 
vassals and damage to the treasury, for it. seems as though the 
sole object of the inquisitors is to diminish the royal patrimony.” 
Similar troubles attended the levying of the servicio de millones, 
an exceedingly unpopular impost on wine, meat, vinegar and 
other necessaries.® 

When, in 1631, the tax of media afiata, or half a year’s salary 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Leg. 1465, fol. 27; Libro 939, fol. 144.— 
Bibl. nacional, Seccion de MSS., D, 118, p. 102.—Modo de Proceder, fol. 45 (Bibl. 
nacional, D, 122). 

2 Bibl. nacional, Seccion de MSS., S, 88, p. 102. 

3 Archivo de Simancas, Libro 21, fol. 37; Leg. 1465, fol. 27 


378 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


levied on appointees to office, was imposed there was a discus- 
sion as to whether it was applicable to the Inquisition. This 
was settled in the affirmative and the Suprema made no objec- 
tion, for its collection was taken from the Sala de Media 
Afata and was given to Gabriel Ortiz de Sotomayor, appointed 
by Inquisitor-general Zapata and when he, in the course of a 
few years, became Bishop of Badajoz, the business was intrusted 
to the inquisitor-general himself. For awhile the payments 
were made with some regularity, but, in 1650, an investigation 
showed that for a long while it had been quietly allowed to 
drop and, as it was in the hands of the inquisitor-general, there 
were no means of enforcing an accounting. For a year Arce y 
Reynoso eluded the efforts of the Sala de Media Afiata to obtain 
information and finally, May 17, 1651, the king ordered him 
peremptorily to pay his own media afiata (due since 1643), to 
make the other officials do so and to furnish the required informa- 
tion to the Sala. On receiving this he said there were difficulties 
in making ecclesiastics like inquisitors pay, but he would con- 
sult the Suprema and reply in July. July passed away and the 
Sala again applied to him, when he replied that, as concerned 
the familiars and other secular officials, orders had already been 
given and collections nade, but as to clerics there were scruples 
about which he would advise with the king. He failed to do so 
and in October the king was urged to repeat his demand for 
immediate payment. The outcome of the affair was that eccle- 
siastics were exempted and laymen had to pay, while familiars, 
who had no salaries, were assessed nine ducats—so Arce y Rey- 
noso succeeded in eluding his tax. Collection, moreover, from 
the laymen was not easy and, January 28, 1654, the Suprema 
issued general instructions to deduct it without exception from 
the salaries. This only transferred the indebtedness from the 
individuals to the receivers or treasurers of the tribunals, who 
seem to have been equally slow to pay and, in 1655, an inquisi- 
tor in each tribunal of Castile and the colonies was designated | 
to collect the money from the treasurer and remit it at once. 
It is safe to assume that the receipts were trivial and the 
whole business affords an illustration of the methods by which 
the revenues of Spain were frittered away before reaching the 


? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 40, fol. 168, 203, 212, 229, 294.— 
Modo de Proceder, fol. 9 (Bibl. nacional, Seecion de MSS., D, 122).—Archivo 
hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 13, n. 2, fol. 42; Legajo 299. 


Cuap. IIT] TAXATION 379 


treasury. Whether productive or not, however, the media afiata 
remained until the end a permanent charge upon the lay officials. 
In Valencia, in 1790, it had for ten years amounted to an annual 
average of ten libras.’ 

With regard to local taxation, contests were renewed at every 
new impost with varying success, and a single case will elucidate 
the character of these struggles. In 1645 the Cortes of Valencia 
agreed to furnish for six years twelve hundred men to garrison 
Tortosa, reserving the right to impose whatever duties or excise 
might be necessary to defray the expense. In order that the 
clergy might be included the assent of Archbishop Aliaga was 
sought, which he granted with difficulty and only on condition 
that, within eight months, a confirmatory papal brief should 
be obtained, which was duly accomplished. To meet the charge 
an excise, known as the szsa del corte was levied on all goods 
cut for garments. The tribunal refused to submit to this and 
pointed to its contributions to a loan of twenty thousand ducats 
made by the Inquisition to the king in 1642, and to its pay- 
ment since 1643 of five per cent. of the salaries for the main- 
tenance of certain mounted men. The city yielded for awhile 
and then a compromise was made; the ecclesiastics at the time 
were paying eighteen deniers on the libra (7% per cent.) while 
the officials of the tribunal were to be taxed only six deniers 
(25 per cent.). To maintain their principle of exemption, how- 
ever, for some years they had their garments made in the name 
of other ecclesiastics and paid the eighteen deniers, but in 1659 
they grew tired of this and paid the six deniers for themselves, 
first registering a protest that it was without prejudice to their 
privileges and exemptions. This continued until 1668, when 
suddenly, on June 19th, the fiscal of the tribunal summoned 
the collectors of the sisa del corte to pass freely, within twenty- 
four hours, the cloth cut for the garments of Benito Sanguino, 
the alealde mayor, under pain of five hundred ducats. On the 
21st the syndics of the city and the collectors interjected an 
appeal to the king, in spite of which the next day the mandate 
was repeated, this time giving twelve hours for obedience and 
adding excommunication to the fine. Another appeal was 
interposed and the regent of the Audiencia applied for a com-. 


! Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 14, n. 2, fol. 28; Cartas 
del Consejo, Leg. 16, n. 9, fol. 7. 


380 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


petencia, or orderly method of settling disputes, as provided 
in the Concordia, but notwithstanding this the next day the 
excommunications were published and the names of the col- 
lectors were affixed to the doors of the cathedral as under the 
anathema of the Church.’ The final outcome is of little moment; 
the interest of the affair lies in its illustration of the persistence 
of the Inquisition and the violence of its methods. 

In this respect the case is not exceptional. The formularies 
of the Inquisition contained a full assortment of arbitrary man- 
dates which it employed, in place of seeking the legal courses 
prescribed in the Concordias, by which the king and the Cortes 
sought to preserve the peace. One of these, drawn in the name 
of the tribunal of Llerena, addressed to the governor and magis- 
trates, recites that complaint has been made of the imposition 
on officials and familiars of a new octroi on meat and proceeds 
to assert that, by immemorial custom and royal cédulas, the 
commissioned officials are exempted from paying any taxes, 
excise, imposts and assessments, whether royal or local or other- 
wise; the magistrates are commanded within two hours to desist 
from the attempt, under pain of major excommunication and 
a fine of a hundred thousand maravedis for the governor or 
his deputy and of fifty thousand for subordinates, with the 
threat, in case of disobedience, of prosecution with the full 
rigor of law. Moreover the secretary or notary of the city is 
ordered within the two hours to bring to the tribunal and sur- 
render all papers concerning the assessment on the officials, 
under pain of excommunication and ten thousand maravedis.? 
Such were the peremptory commands habitually employed, 
the arrogance of which rendered them especially galling. 

Not only were these fulminations ready for use when the case 
occurred, but there were formulas drawn up in advance to pre- 
vent any attempted infraction of the privileges claimed by the 
officials. Thus this same collection has one addressed to the 
corregidor and magistrates of a town where a fair is to be held, 
reciting that an official of the tribunal proposes to send thither 
a certain number of cattle bearing his brand, which he swears 
to be of his own raising and, as he is exempt from paying alcavala, 
tolls, ferriages, royal servicio and all other assessments and 


1 Archivo hist, nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 1, n. 1, fol. 11, 222.— 
Bibl. nacional, Seccion de MSS., D, 118, n. 2, fol. 17. 
2 Modo de Proceder, fol. 44 (Bibl. nacional, D, 122). 


Cuap. IIT] TAXATION 381 


dues and, as he fears that there may be an attempt to impose 
them, therefore all officials and collectors are ordered, under 
pain of major excommunication and two hundred ducats, to 
abstain from all such attempts, with threats of further punish- 
ment in case of disobedience.t The enormous advantage which 
the official thus possessed is plain, as well as the door which it 
opened to fraud. That the claim was groundless appears by a 
memorial presented to the Suprema in 1623, in response to a call 
by Inquisitor-general Pacheco on his colleagues for suggestions 
as to the better government and improvement of the Inquisition 
—a remarkable paper to which reference will frequently be 
made hereafter. On this point it states that, in some tribunals, 
the officials are exempted from paying the alcavala on the pro- 
ducts of their estates, while in others they are not. In some, 
a portion of the officials have dexterously secured exemption, 
while others have been compelled to pay, by judicial decision, 
as there is no basis for such claims. If there is no right or privi- 
lege of exemption, it is not seen how the officials can conscien- 
tiously escape payment, or how the inquisitors can defend them 
in evading it, besides the numerous suits thence arising which 
occupy the time of the tribunals. To cure this it is suggested 
that the king grant exemptions to all, for there are not more 
than two or three in each tribunal to be thus benefited.? This 
suggestion was not adopted, but the claim was persisted in 
with its perpetual exasperation and multiplicity of litigation. 

The large numbers of the unsalaried officials, especially the 
familiars, rendered the question of their exemption of con- 
siderably greater importance. They had no claim to it, but 
they were persistently endeavoring to establish the right and 
for the most part they were supported by the tribunals in the 
customary arbitrary fashion. In the futile Concordia of Cata- 
lonia in 1599, it was provided that levies and executions for 
all taxes and imposts could be made on familiars and com- 
missioners by the ordinary officers of justice. In the memorial 
to Clement VIII asking for the disallowance of this Concordia, 
the Suprema proved learnedly, by a series of canons from the 
fourth Council of Lateran down, that the cruce-signati (whom 
it claimed to correspond with the modern familiars) were exempt. 


1 Modo de Proceder, fol. 45 (loc. cit.). 
2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 926, fol. 26. 


382 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


It even had the audacity to cite the Concordia of 1514, which 
in reality denied their exemption, and it assumed with equal 
untruth that this was the universal custom in Spain.* Yet, ina 
consulta of December 30, 1633, the Suprema tacitly excluded 
the unsalaried officials when it argued that there were not, 
exclusive of ecclesiastics, more than two hundred officials in 
Spain entitled to the exemption.’ 

Still, the Inquisition fought the battle for the unsalaried 
officials with as much vigor as for the salaried. In 1634 the 
levying of a few reales on a familiar of Vicalvero, on the occasion 
of the voyage to Barcelona of the Infante Fernando, was re- 
sisted with such violence by the tribunal of Toledo, that finally 
the king had to intervene, resulting in the banishment and 
deprival of temporalities of a clerical official and the summon- 
ing to court of the senior inquisitor.? In 16386, Philip IV, to 
meet the extravagant outlays on the palace of Buen Retiro, 
levied a special tax on all the towns of the district of Madrid. 
In Vallecas the quota was assessed on the inhabitants, among 
whom was a familiar who refused to pay, when the local alcaldes 
levied upon his property. He appealed to the Suprema which 
referred the matter to the tribunal of Toledo and it arrested 
the alcaldes and condemned them in heavy penalties. Then 
the Alcaldes de Casa y Corte, the highest criminal court, inter- 
vened and arrested the familiar, whereupon the Suprema twice 
sent to the Sala de los Alcaldes, declaring them to be excom- 
municated, but the bearer of the censure was refused audience. 
On this the Suprema, with the assent of the Council of Castile, 
sent a cleric to arrest the alcaldes and convey them out of the 
kingdom, and on March 12th, in all the churches of Madrid, 
they were published as excommunicate and subject to all the 
penalties of the bull in Cena Domini.t| What was the outcome 
of this the chronicler fails to inform us, but the Council of Castile 
took a different view of the question when, in 1639, one of its 
members, Don Antonio Valdés, who had been sent to Extre- 
madura as commissioner to raise troops, was publicly excom- 
municated by the tribunal of Llerena because, in assessing con- 


1 Constitutions del Cort de 1599, n. 51 (Barcelona, 1603, fol. xvii).—Archivo 
de Simancas, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Leg. 17, fol. 5. 

? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 32, fol. 110. 

3 Consulta magna (Bibl. nacional, Seccion de MSS., Q, 4). 

* Ant. Rodriguez Villa, La Corte y Monarquia de Espafia, p. 16. 


Cuap. IIT] TAXATION 383 


tributions for that purpose, he had not exempted its officials 
and familiars. The Council thereupon appealed to Philip, who 
ordered the decree expunged from the records and that a copy 
of the royal order should be posted in the secretariate of the 
tribunal.’ : 

Yet it was about this time that the claim in behalf of un- 
salaried officials seems to have been abandoned, for, in 1636, 
1643 and 1644 the Suprema issued repeated injunctions that 
in the existing distress the royal imposts and taxes must be paid. 
In 1646 it ordered the tribunal of Valencia not to defend two 
familiars in resisting payment and in the same year the Cértes 
of Aragon gained a victory which subjected them to all local 
charges.’ 

With the advent of the Bourbons the salaried officials found 
a change in this as in so much else. In the financial exigencies 
of the War of Succession they were subjected to repeated levies. 
Philip V called upon them for five per cent. of their salaries and 
then for ten per cent. to which they were forced to submit. 
In 1712 a general tax was laid of a doubloon per hearth, which 
was assessed in each community according to the wealth of the 
individual. There were no exemptions and appeals were heard 
only by the provincial superintendents of the revenue. The 
sole concession obtained by the Suprema was that, where officials 
of the Inquisition were concerned, the local tribunal could name 
an assessor to sit with the superintendent and it warned the 
tribunals that any interference with the collection would be 
repressed with the utmost severity.* Salaries, however, were 
held to be subject only to demands from the crown for, when 
Saragossa in 1727 endeavored to include them in an assessment 
for local taxation, Philip, in response to an appeal from the 
Suprema, decided that those of the Inquisition, in common with 
other tribunals, should be exempt, but that real and personal 
property, including trade, belonging to officials, should be held 
liable to the tax.* 


1 Consulta Magna of 1696 (Bibl. nacional, MSS., Q, 4). 

? Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 9, n. 3, fol. 78.—MSS. 
of Royal Library of Copenhagen, 218>, p. 222.—Bibl. nacional, MSS., D, 118, 
fol. 122. 

3 Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 3, fol, 71, 76, 101, 109, 
111, 121, 123, 124, 125, 188, 213; Leg. 13, n. 2, fol. 71, 

* Ibidem, Leg. 14, n. 1, fol. 148.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 
27, fol. 85. 


384 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Book II 


Towards the close of the eighteenth century various docu- 
ments show that all ideas of resistance and all pleas of exemption 
had been abandoned. The Holy Office submitted to ordinary 
and extraordinary exactions and the Suprema warned the 
tribunals that the assessments were wholly in the hands of the 
royal officers and that it had no cognizance of the matter. The 
calls were frequent and heavy, as when, in 1794, four per cent. 
was levied on all salaries of over eight hundred ducats, and 
three months later a demand was made of one-third of the 
fruits of all benefices and prebends, which was meekly submitted 
to and statements were obediently rendered.’ Under the Restora- 
tion, the Inquisition was less tractable. In 1818 an income- 
tax was levied and was imposed on all salaries, including those 
of the Suprema, which at once prepared for resistance. There 
seems to have been a prolonged struggle with a successful result 
for, on November 17th, it issued a circular enclosing a royal 
order which conceded exemption.’ 


The exemption from taxation, which included import and 
export dues or merchandise ‘and provisions required for officials 
and prisoners, led to the claim of other privileges and to not a 
few abuses. It was not confined to sea-ports and frontier towns, 
for the jealous particularism of the kingdoms, dynastically 
united, kept up their antagonistic policy towards each other 
and intercourse between them was subjected to regulations 
similar to those of foreign trade. The exemption from these, 
as well as from the octroi duties of the towns, was a most im- 
portant privilege, capable of being turned to account in many 
ways besides diminishing the expenses of the officials. 

We have seen that Ferdinand, in 1508, prohibited the issue 
of orders to pass goods free, but nevertheless it continued. 
When, in 1540, Blas Ortiz went to take possession of his office 
as inquisitor of Valencia, the Suprema furnished him with a 
pass addressed to all customs officials permitting him to cross 
the frontiers with three horses and four pack-mules; he could 
be required to swear that what he carried was his private 
property and was not for sale, but all further interference was 


1 Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Mbrsete Leg. 16, n. 6, fol. 10, 19, 38; 
Leg. 4, n. 8, fol. 103, 115, 142, 166, 311. 

: RIES de sHopaer, Tacit Libro 559.—Archivo de Sevilla, Seccion 
primera, Carpeta 58, n. 454 (Sevilla, 1860). 


Cuap. IIT] CUSTOMS DUTIES 385 


forbidden under pain of excommunication and a hundred ducats.! 
It was not only on such occasions, however, that the custom- 
houses were thus eluded. Before the introduction of regular 
posts, the constant communications between the tribunals 
and with the Suprema were carried by couriers or by muleteers, 
and the mysterious secrecy which shrouded all the operations 
of the Holy Office furnished an excuse for preventing any risk 
that these sacred packages should be examined. All bearers 
of letters therefore, even when they had loaded mules, were 
furnished with passes forbidding, under excommunication and 
fine, any unpacking or investigation of what they carried, 
The facilities thus offered for contraband trade are obvious 
and their value can only be appreciated through a knowledge 
of the elaborate system of import and export duties and pro- 
hibitions of import and export which characterize the policy 
of the period.’ Complaints were fruitless, for when the Coun- 
cil of Hacienda issued letters against certain familiars in the 
Canaries, detected in importing prohibited goods, Philip II, 
February 11, 1593, ordered the letters to be recalled and that 
no more should be issued.‘ 

There were few things concerning which there was more 
jealousy than the transfer of grain from one Spanish kingdom 
to another, and when it was permitted there were duties, either 
import or export or perhaps both. Deficient harvests, in one 
province or another, were not infrequent and the tribunals were 
constantly seeking special relief by obtaining permits to violate 
the laws, or by violating the laws without permits. Many 
instances of this could be cited, but it will suffice to recount 
the experience of the Valencia tribunal in endeavoring to obtain 
wheat from Aragon. For this it had special facilities, for the 
Aragonese districts of Teruel and Albarracin were subject to 
it, but, on the other hand, Aragon was especially firm in pro- 
hibiting the exportation of wheat. In 1522 the tribunal under- 
took to bring some wheat from Aragon and threatened the 
frontier officials with excommunication if they should interfere. 
In spite of this they detained it, when the inquisitor published 


= 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Sala 40, Lib. 4, fol. 109. 
2 Modo de Proceder, fol. 77 (Bibl. nacional, MSS., D, 122), —Archivo de Binant 
cas, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Legajo 17, ‘oll 20. 
’ See the Libre dels quatre Senyals, Barosonn 1634. 
* Portocarrero, op. cit., 3 57. 
25 


386 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


the censures and imprisoned a guard whom he caught, where- 
upon the Aragonese Diputados remonstrated, saying that if the 
emperor or pope wanted wheat from Aragon he applied for a 
licence, and begging the inquisitor to keep within his juris- 
diction and release the guard. Then an accommodation was 
reached and the tribunal was permitted to bring in thirty cahizes 
(about one hundred bushels), on condition of removing any 
excommunication that might exist, but it repudiated its side 
of the agreement and summoned the officials to appear and 
receive penance. This exhausted the patience of the Diputados; 
they ordered the wheat to be stopped or, if it had gone forward, 
to be followed and captured with the mules bearing it; the 
inquisitor might do what he pleased, but they would employ 
all the forces of the kingdom and enforce respect for the laws. 
The position in which the inquisitor had placed himself was 
so untenable that the inquisitor-general issued an order for- 
bidding tribunals to take anything out of Aragon in violation 
of the prohibitions.’ 

The effect of this rebuff was evanescent. The tribunal per- 
sisted and hy false pretences established a claim which, in 1591, 
the Suprema warned it to use with moderation as the Council of 
Aragon was making complaint. As usual no attention was paid 
to this and, in 1597, Philip II was compelled to interfere because 
the tribunal was issuing to excess letters authorizing the export 
of wheat from Teruel—an abuse which was doubtless abun- 
dantly profitable.” If this brought any amendment it was tran- 
sient. On June 16, 1606, the Diputados represented to the 
tribunal that they were bound by their oaths of office, under 
pain of excommunication, to enforce the laws prohibiting the 
export of wheat; that, in spite of these laws, large quantities 
were carried to Valencia, to the destruction and total ruin of 
the land, by individuals armed with licences issued by the tri- 
bunal, wherefore they prayed that no more licences be issued. 
No attention was paid to this and on January 8, 1607, they wrote 
again, stating that the abuse was increasing and that they must 
appeal to the king and the Suprema for its suppression. This 
brought an answer to the effect that the tribunal was more mod- 
erate than it had previously been and would continue to be so 


1 Sayas, Afiales de Aragon, cap. 85, p. 567. 
2 Archivo hist. nacional, Tauern de Valencia, Leg. 5, n. 1, fol. 298, 313, 
339, 405.—Portocarrero, op. cit., 3 58. 


Cuap. IIT] IMPORTATION OF WHEAT 387 


as it would find convenient, without prejudice to the rights con- 
ceded to it by the royal cédulas and, as it was occupied in the 
service of God, it could reasonably exercise those rights. The 
asserted rights under which it had so long nullified the laws of 
Aragon were a conscious fraud for, when it complained to the 
Suprema of the interference of the Diputados with its imme- 
morial privilege and enclosed the royal cédula conferring it, the 
Suprema pointed out that this referred only to Castile and not 
to Aragon ; the complaints of the Diputados had been listened to 
and all that could be done was to invoke the good offices of the 
Saragossa tribunal to obtain permission to get fifteen hundred 
bushels per annum. The Saragossa inquisitors willingly lent their 
aid, but in vain. They wrote, June 6, 1608, that they had 
brought to bear all their influence on the Diputados who declared 
that the fuero prohibiting the export of grain was too strict for 
them to violate it. A correspondence ensued with the Suprema 
which ordered the tribunal, February 8, 1610, to abstain, as pre- 
viously ordered, but if, in any year, there should be special 
necessity, it might report the quantity required when instruc- 
tions would be given. This imposed silence on it until 1618, 
when another attempt was made to overcome the obstinacy of 
the Diputados; it had abstained, the tribunal said, for some 
years from issuing licences, in consequence of the great abuses 
and excesses of those to whom they were granted, but now the 
sterility of the land causes great inconveniences and it asks that 
the fruits of its prebends in Aragon and its rents be invested in 
wheat allowed to be exported. The Diputados however wisely 
refused to open the door; the law to which they had sworn im- 
posed heavy penalties for its infraction and they were com- 
pelled to refuse. This was probably effectual, as far as concerned 
Aragon, for we happen to find the tribunal, in 1631, obtaining 
from the king licence to import two hundred and fifty bushels 
from Castile.’ 

This narrative is instructive in more ways than one. ‘The pre- 
tence of necessity in the service of God was as fraudulent as the 
claims put forward. The whole business was purely speculative 
and the licences were doubtless sold to the highest bidder through 
all these years. The Valencian tribunal was at no time in need 
of wheat from Aragon or Castile, for it had ample privileges at 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 688, fol. 66.—Archivo hist. nacional, 
Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 1, n. 6, fol. 634; Leg. 8, n. 2, fol. 73. 


388 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


home for all its wants and it was working these local privileges 
for a profit to some one. Among other public-spirited acts of 
Ximenes was the founding, in 1512, of an alhondiga, or public 
granary, in Toledo so that, as we are told in 1569, in times of 
searcity the citizens could procure supplies at moderate prices. 
It was probably owing to this that other cities, including 
Valencia, formed establishments of the kind, monopolizing the 
traffic in wheat, to which the citizens resorted day by day for 
their provision. When a loss occurred in the business, from a 
surplus over the demand or from spoiling of the grain, it was 
assessed upon the citizens, under the name of pan asegurado, 
but, in 1530, the magistrates relieved the officials of the tribunal 
from sharing this burden and the exemption is enumerated, in 
1707, as still among its privileges.” Another privilege, which it 
shared with the viceroy and the archbishop, was that the baker 
who served it was the second one allowed every morning to enter 
the granary and select a sack of wheat (trigo fuerte) of five and a 
half bushels and every week a cah2z (3) bushels) of trigo candeal, 
without payment save a small tax known as murs y valls—evi- 
dently for the maintenance of the city defences. This he baked 
and distributed the bread among the officials and to the prison, 
in allotted portions, and what was over he sold—showing that 
the tribunal not only got its wheat gratuitously but more than 
it needed, to somebody’s profit. The amount must have been 
considerable, for the bakers complained of the unfair competition 
of the favored baker and, in 1609, the city endeavored to put an 
end to the abuse, but without success. The matter slumbered 
until 1627, when the city obtained a royal cédula abolishing the 
privilege of taking the wheat, but obedience to this was refused 
because it had been issued without preliminary notice to the 
other side and without a junta or conference between the Suprema 
and the Council of Aragon. Then the city ordered the baker no 
longer to go to the granary for wheat and the aggrieved Suprema 
complained loudly to the king, urging him to consider the ser- 
vices to God and the tonsure of the inquisitors and not to allow 


* Gomesii de Rebus gestis a Fr. Ximenio, Lib. V, fol. 140. 

? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 688, fol. 529.—Archivo hist. nacional, 
Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 2, n. 18. 

There was a similar arrangement in Barcelona and, in 1532, the Suprema orders 
the inquisitors not to allow familiars to be compelled to pay this assessment.— 
Archivo de Simancas, Libro 77, fol. 44. 


Cuap. III] EVASION OF OCTROI DUTIES 389 


these holy labors to be interrupted by the necessity of going per- 
sonally to the granary. To this Philip replied by ordering the 
fueros to be observed, which was virtually a confirmation of his 
cédula, but this seems to have been similarly disregarded, for, in 
1628, we find the city again endeavoring to put an end to the 
collateral abuse of the sale of the surplus bread and the tribunal 
busily engaged in gathering. testimony to prove that this had 
publicly been the custom from time immemorial. In proving 
this, however, it also proved unconsciously how fraudulent had 
been the claim that it had been in need of wheat from Aragon.! 

This commercial development of the Inquisition led it to 
utilize its exemption froin taxation and octroi duties by opening - 
shops for the necessaries of life, causing violent quarrels with 
the cities whose revenues were impaired and whose laws were 
ostentatiously disregarded. Among a number of cases of this 
in the records, a series of occurrences in Saragossa will illustrate 
this phase of the activity of the Holy Office. A large part of 
the local revenues of the city was derived from a monopoly of 
wine, meal and provisions and no citizen was allowed to bring 
these articles within the gates. The Aljaferfa, occupied by the 
trbunal, was situated a few hundred feet beyond the walls; the 
inquisitors assumed that they were not bound by the municipal 
regulations; they introduced what they pleased into the town 
and the authorities complained that they maintained in the 
Aljaferfa a public meat-market, a tavern and a shop where 
citizens could purchase freely to the infinite damage of the 
public revenues. The Cédrtes of 1626 demanded that affairs 
should be reduced to what they had been prior to the troubles of 
1591, when the Aljaferfa was garrisoned with soldiers, giving 
rise to profitable trade, but the Suprema prevented the royal 
confirmation of the acts of the Cértes and the matter was left 
open. This led to troubles which came to a head, September 
21, 1626, when a load of wine for the tribunal on entering the 
city was seized under the law by the guard and taken to the house 
of one of the jurados or town-councillors. At once the inquisi- 
tors issued letters demanding its release under pain of excom- 
munication and a thousand ducats. The jurados lost no time 
in forming the competencia, which, in accordance with the exist- 
ing Concordia, was the method provided for deciding such 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 19, fol. 289; Libro 688, fol. 66, 255. 
—Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 1, n. 6, fol. 199. . 


390 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


contests, but the inquisitors refused to join in it, asserting that 
there could be no competencia, as it was a matter of faith and 
impeding the Inquisition in the exercise of its functions. They 
arrested and imprisoned one of the guards, notwithstanding that 
he had letters of manzfestacion from the court of the Justicia of 
Aragon—a, species of habeas corpus of the highest privilege in 
Aragon, which was traditionally venerated as the palladium of 
popular liberty—and the next day they seized three more who 
were likewise manifestados. The incensed magistrates applied 
to the Justicia and to the Diputados, to release by force the 
prisoners from the Aljaferia and there was prospect of serious 
disorder. The Governor of Aragon, however succeeded in getting 
himself accepted as umpire by both sides and temporarily quieted 
them by the compromise that the wagon, mules and wine should 
be delivered to him, that the prisoners should be surrendered 
through him to the city and that the comminatory letters should 
be withdrawn, all this being without prejudice to either party. 
He wrote earnestly to the king, pointing out the imminent danger 
of an outbreak and the necessity of a decision that should avert 
such perils for the future; if the assumption that such questions 
were matters of faith were admitted, the inquisitors could refuse 
all competencias, which would annul the Concordia and destroy 
the royal jurisdiction. The city also addressed him, saying that 
the inquisitors had refused to abstain from further action pend- 
ing his decision and if these pretensions were admitted they would 
be unable to pay him the servicio which had been granted.’ 
This resulted in a compromise, agreed upon between the 
Suprema and the Council of Aragon, under which the city obli- 
gated itself to supply the tribunal with meat, wine and ice. It 
was impossible however to compel the Inquisition to observe 
compacts. Fresh complaints arose, the nature of which is indi- 
cated by a decree of Philip IV, June 17, 1630, requiring the 
Suprema to order the inquisitors to keep to the agreement and 
not to sell any portion of the provisions furnished and further to 
stop the trade carried on in some little houses in the Aljaferfa 
where the municipal supervisors could not inspect them. This 
resulted in a fresh agreement of December 7, 1631, under which 
the city bought for three thousand crowns the casa de penitencia, 
or prison for penitents, and engaged to maintain in it shops for 


’ Fueros y Actos de Corte in Barbastro y Calatayud, afio de 1626 (Zaragoza, 
1627, p. 20).—Archivo gén. de la C. de Aragon, Leg. 528, n. 3. 


Cuap. III] SALT AND BAKE-OVEN 391 


the sale of meat and ice to the inhabitants of the Aljaferfa at 
the prices current in the town." 

Probably this quieted the matter, but before long the irre- 
pressible inquisitors started another disturbance. The salt-works 
of Remolinos and el Castellon belonged to the royal patrimony 
and were farmed out under condition that no other salt should 
be sold or used in Saragossa.and some other places under heavy 
fines. To enforce this there were commissioners empowered to 
investigate all suspected places, even churches not being exempt. 
In 1640 a party in the city was found to be selling salt and con- 
fessed that he obtained it from the gardener of the Aljaferfa. 
The commissioner, Baltasar Peralta, went there with a scrivener 
and in the gardener’s cottage they found two sacks, one empty, 
the other nearly full of salt, with a half-peck measure. They 
announced the penalty to the gardener’s wife and proceeded to 
enforce it in the customary manner by seizing pledges—in the 
present case, three horses. The inquisitor, who had doubtless 
been sent for, came as they were leading the horses away, forced 
the surrender of the horses and salt and told them that they 
should deem themselves lucky if they were not thrown in prison. 
Thereupon the royal advocate-fiscal of Aragon, Adrian de Sada, 
reported the case to the king, adding that it was learned that 
the coachman of one of the inquisitors was selling salt from the 
salt-works of Sobradiel. He pointed out that, if the servants of 
the Inquisition could sell salt freely and the royal officials be 
deterred by threats from investigation, the revenue would be 
seriously impaired, for no one would venture to farm the salt- 
works, and he asked for instructions before resorting to pro- 
ceedings which might disturb the public peace, as had happened 
on previous occasions. The matter was referred to the Council 
of Aragon, which advised the king to issue imperative commands 
that the inquisitors should not obstruct the detection and punish- 
ment of frauds, for their cognizance in no way pertained to the 
Holy Office.’ 

The Saragossa tribunal had a still more prolonged and bitter 
dispute with the city over the bake-oven of the Aljaferfa. This 
belonged to the crown and, at some time prior to 1630, Philip 
IV made it over to the tribunal which was pleading poverty. 
Its use of the privilege soon brought it into conflict with the city, 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 20, fol. 54; Libro 62, fol. 457. 
? Archivo gén. de la C. de Aragon, Leg. 528, n. 3. 


392 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


but a complicated arrangement respecting it was included in 
the agreement of December 7, 1631, requiring the baker to 
purchase at least seventy bushels of wheat per month from the 
public granary, with certain restrictions as to the places whence he 
could procure further supplies. In 1649 we chance to learn that 
the oven was farmed out for six thousand reales per annum and, 
in 1663, a lively conflict arose because the tribunal had granted 
a lease which was not subject to the restrictions of 1631. Then 
again, in 1690, the trouble broke out afresh, each side accusing 
the other of violating the agreement. All the authorities, from the 
king and viceroy down, were invoked to settle it; there were fears 
of violence but, May 1, 1691, the tribunal reported to the Suprema 
that a compromise had been reached on satisfactory terms.’ 

The independent spirit of Aragon caused it to suffer less from 
the mercantile enterprises of the Inquisition than the more 
submissive temper of Castile. In 1623 there was a flagrant case 
in Toledo, arising from a butcher-shop established by the tribunal 
in violation of the municipal laws. Its violent methods triumphed 
and Don Luis de Paredes, an alcalde de corte, sent thither to 
settle the matter, was disgraced for attempting to restrain it. 
This called forth an energetic protest from the Council of Castile, 
which boldly told the king that he should not shut his eyes to 
the fact that the inquisitors were extending their privileges to 
matters beyond their competence, with such prejudice to the 
public weal that they were making themselves superior to the 
laws, to the government and to the royal power, trampling on 
the judges, seizing the original documents, forcing them to revoke 
their righteous acts, arresting their officials and treating them 
as heretics because they discharged their duty.’ 

In procuring provisions, whether for consumption or sale, 
besides the freedom from local imposts, the Inquisition had the 
further advantage of employing coercive methods on unwilling 
vendors and of disregarding local regulations and prohibitions. 
As early as 1533 the Aragonese, at the Cortes of Monzon, took 
the alarm and petitioned that the statutes of the towns, when 
short of bread-stuffs and provisions, should be binding on officials 
of the Inquisition, to which the emperor’s reply was the equivo- 


* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 38, fol. 22; Libro 62, fol. 457, 526, 528, 
544; Lib. 922, fol. 453. 

? Bibl. nacional, MSS., Mm, 464.—Archivo de Simancas, Gracia y Justicia, Leg. 
621, fol. 45, 46. 


Cuap. IIT] SEIZURE OF PROVISIONS 393 


cating one customary when evading confirmation.’ The sig- 
nificance of this is manifested by a carta acordada of 1540, author- 
izing the tribunals to get wheat in the villages for their officials 
and prisoners and, if the local magistrates interfere, to coerce 
them with excommunication. Yet inquisitorial zeal in using 
this permission sometimes overstepped the bounds and, in this 
same year, the Suprema had occasion to rebuke a tribunal which 
had issued orders to furnish it with wheat under pain of a hundred 
lashes, for it was told that, in rendering such extra-judicial 
sentences, it was exceeding its jurisdiction.2, How bravely the 
Suprema itself overcame all such scruples was manifest when 
laws of maximum prices, and the heavy discount on the legal- 
tender spurious vellon coinage, rendered holders of goods un- 
willing to part with them at the legal rates. It issued, February 
14, 1626, to its alcalde, Pedro de Salazar, an order to go to any 
places in the vicinage and embargo sheep and whatever else he 
deemed necessary, sufficient for the maintenance of the house- 
holds of the inquisitor-general and of the members and officials, 
paying therefore at the rates fixed by law, to effect which he 
was empowered to call for aid on all royal justices, who were 
required to furnish all necessary aid under penalty of major 
excommunication latw sententie and five hundred ducats. So 
again, on April 11, 1630, Salazar was ordered to go anywhere in 
the kingdom and seize six bushels of wheat, in baked bread, for 
the same households, paying for it at the established price, and all 
officials, secular, ecclesiastical and inquisitorial, were required 
to assist him under the same penalties.* This was an organized 
raid on all the bakeries of Madrid, and Salazar was more scrupu- 
lous than the average official of the time if he did not turn an 
honest penny by taking bread on his own account at the legal 
rate and selling it at the current one.‘ 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Leg. 17, fol. 47, 48. 

2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 939, fol. 63, 64. 

3 Thidem, Libro 940, fol. 220, 221. The excommunication late sententie worked 
of itself when the act was committed and did not require to be published. It 
was one of the worst ecclesiastical abuses and during the later middle ages was 
so lavishly employed that men scarce knew whether or not they were excom- 
municate under some mandate of which they had never heard. 

4 This abuse existed in England under the name of Purveyance and Pre- 
emption, but there it was restricted to the royal household. It inevitably led to 
many abuses and was replaced, in 1660, with an excise on malt and spirituous 


liquors by 12 Carol. II, cap. 24, @3 12-27. 


394 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


The tribunal of Valencia enjoyed another privilege in the 
important matter of salt, the royal monopoly of which rendered 
it so costly to the ordinary consumer. Every year the tribunal 
issued an order to the farmers of the salt-works, commanding 
them, under pain of excommunication and fifty ducats, to deliver 
to the receiver of confiscations twelve cahizes (about forty-two 
bushels) of refined salt, at the price of eight reales the cahiz, and 
the custom-house officials were summoned, under the same 
penalties, to let it pass without detention or trouble for the 
service of God. The salt was duly apportioned among the 
officials at this trivial price, each inquisitor getting four bushels, 
down to the messengers who received two-thirds of a bushel, 
and even jubilado officials had their portion. When or how this 
originated is unknown; in 1644 it seems established as of old 
date and it continued until 1710, when the new dynasty brought 
it to a sudden conclusion. The Council of Hacienda reported 
it to the king, as though it were a novelty just discovered, pointing 
out that the eight reales were less than the cost of transport 
from the works to the magazines; that the manufacture was a 
monopoly of the regalias and the price charged was in no respect 
a tax or impost, but was regulated by the necessities of the 
national defence; that no other tribunal in Spain, secular or 
ecclesiastic, made such a demand, while the publication of cen- 
sures against royal officials was dangerous in those calamitous 
times. This aroused Philip, who ordered a prompt remedy. 
The Suprema no longer ventured an opposition or remonstrance, 
but wrote immediately to Valencia expressing its surprise; the 
demand must be withdrawn at once; if any censures had been 
published they must be revoked and no such demonstration 
should have been made without previous consultation.’ 

It would be superfluous to adduce further examples of the 
manner in which the tribunals abused their power for unlawful 
gains and benefits, and we can readily conceive the exasperation 
thus excited, even among those most zealous in the extermina- 
tion of heresy. 


Few of the privileges claimed by the Inquisition gave rise to 
more bickering and contention than its demand that all con- 
nected with it should be exempt from the billeting of troops 


* Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Libro 7 de Autos, Leg. 2, fol. 
391, 494; Leg. 2, n. 18; Leg. 13, n. 2, fol. 11. 


Cuap. Iil] BILLETING TROOPS 395 


and the furnishing of bagages or beasts of burden for transporta- 
tion. The subject is one of minor importance, but it furnishes 
so typical an illustration of inquisitorial methods that it is worthy 
of examination somewhat in detail. Under the old monarchy 
the yantar or drovt de gite, or right to free quarters, was an in- 
sufferable burden. Almost every Cértes of Leon and Castile, 
from the twelfth century complained of it energetically, for it 
was exercised, not only by the royal court in its incessant pere- 
grinations, but by nobles and others who could enforce it, and it 
was accompanied by spoliation of every kind, while the impress- 
ment of beasts of burden was an associated abuse and even the 
lands of the Church were not exempt. The more independent 
Aragonese were unwilling to submit to it, and a fuero of the 
Cortes of Alcafiiz, in 1436, provided that the courtiers and fol- 
lowers of the king should pay all Christians in whose houses they 
lodged.? When the Inquisition was founded and was to a great 
extent peripatetic, its officials apparently claimed free quarters, 
for a clause in the Instructions of 1498 provides that where a 
tribunal was set up they should pay for their accommodations 
and provide their own beds and necessaries. When travelling, 
a decree of Ferdinand, October 21, 1500, repeated in 1507, 1516, 
1518, 1532, and 1561, provided that they should have gratuitous 
lodging and beds, with food at moderate prices. The frequent 
repetition of this indicates that it aroused opposition and, in 
1601, when the inquisitor of Valencia was ordered to go at once 
on a visitation of Tortosa, he was told not to oppress the city 
by demanding free quarters but to lodge decently in a monastery 
or in the house of some official.° 

Furnishing free quarters however was different from enjoying 
them. Vhe old abuses gradually disappeared with the settled 
habitations for kings and tribunals, but the change in military 
organization, with standing armies, gave rise to others which, 
if more occasional, were also more oppressive—the billeting of 
troops. When Louis XIV resorted to the dragonnades—the 
quartering of dragoons on Huguenot families—as an effective 


1 Cértes de Leon v de Castilla, T. I, II (Madrid, 1861-3).—Colmeiro, Cortes de 
Leon y de Castilla, II, 122, 124, 136, 150, 162-3, 181, 198, 201, 277. 

2 Fueros y Ordinacions del Reyno de Aragon, Lib. vu (Zaragoza, 1624, 
fol. 131). 

8 Arguello, fol. 22. 

4 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 1; Libro 939, fol. 144. 

5 Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 5, n. 2, fol. 304. 


396 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


coercion to conversion, it shows how severe was the infliction. 
The rebellion of Catalonia, in 1640, had for its proximate cause 
the outrages committed by troops quartered for the winter in 
places insufficient for their support, culminating in their burning 
the churches of Riu de Arenas and Montiré.’’ The massacre in 
Saragossa, December 28, 1705, of the French troops in the service 
of Philip V, had the same origin.’ 

As the pay of Spanish armies was habitually in arrears and 
the commissariat system imperfect, it can be realized how valu- 
able was the privilege of exemption from entertaining these unin- 
vited guests and providing them with transportation when they 
departed. In the war with Portugal, in 1666, Galicia suffered 
so seriously that we are told a company of cavalry was worth 
to its captain two thousand ducats in ransoms, from outrage.’ 
That the Inquisition should claim such exemption was to be ex- 
pected, for it was one of the privileges of hidalgos, but the earliest 
allusion to it that I have met occurs in 1548, when Inquisitor- 
general Valdés ordered that no billets must be given on houses 
occupied by inquisitors or officials, even though not their own 
or during their absence, for their clothes were in them.* What 
authority he had to issue such a command it might be difficult - 
to say, but it indicates that the exemption was an innovation 
and, as it refers only to salaried officials, it infers that the numer- 
ous unsalaried ones were not entitled to the privilege, which 
is further proved by the fact that, in the Castilian Concordia of 
1553, regulating the exemptions of familiars, there is no allusion 
to billeting. The action of Valdés, however, settled the matter as 
far as the salaried officials were concerned and even the Aragon- 
ese Cortes of 1646, which greatly limited the claims of the Inqui- 
sition, admitted that they had the same privileges as hidalgos.® 

The determination with which this was enforced is seen in a 
case in 1695, when Inquisitor Sanz y Mufioz of Barcelona threat- 
ened with excommunication and a fine of two hundred libras 
the town-councillors of Manlleu if they should assign quarters 
in a country-house belonging to the portero of the Inquisition, 
although it was occupied by a peasant who worked on the land. 


* Parets, Sucesos de Catalonia (Mem. hist. Espafiol, XX, 150-182; Appendix, 
pp. 219, 299, 301, 312). 

* Macanaz, Regalfas de los Reyes de Aragon, p. 111 (Madrid, 1879). 

* Candamo, op. cit. (Valladares, Semanario ertid., IV, 13). 

* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 939, fol. 144. 

° Fueros y Actos de Corte de Zaragoza, 1645-6 (Zaragoza, 1647, p. 10). 


Cuap. IIT] BILLETING TROOPS 397 


The councillors appealed for protection to the Audiencia, or 
royal court, which invited the inquisitor to settle the matter 
amicably in the prescribed form of a competencia, but he treated 
the overture with such contempt that he promptly issued a 
second mandate, under the same penalties, and summoned the 
councillors to appear before him as having incurred them. The 
Audiencia made another attempt at pacification to which he 
replied that he proposed at once to declare the councillors as 
publicly excommunicated. The Diputados of Catalonia there- 
upon protested vigorously to the king that, while all the rest of 
the people were patriotically united in aiding the war, and the 
gentry had voluntarily foregone their privilege of exemption, the 
officials and familiars of the Inquisition were exciting tumults 
and riots in their efforts to extend exemptions to those who had 
no claim.’ 

The chief trouble arose with the unsalaried officials, especially 
the multitudinous familiars, who had no claim to exemption. 
The Barcelona tribunal seems to have started it, for one of the 
complaints made to de Soto Salazar, on his visitation of 1567, 
was that the inquisitors forbade the quartering of soldiers in the 
houses of familiars; in his report he suggested that it should be 
done when necessary and the Aragonese Concordia of 1568 fol- 
lowed this idea by prohibiting inquisitors to support familiars 
in refusing to receive men assigned to them when there were no 
other houses to receive them.? There was evidently no recog- 
nized exemption but a steady effort to establish one, while the 
familiars complained that the hatred felt for them led to their 
being oppressed with billets when others went free. To remedy 
this Philip II, in a cédula of February 21, 1576, ordered that no 
discrimination should be made against them, but that they should 
be placed on an equality with justicias and regidores who were not 
called upon to furnish quarters until all other houses were occu- 
pied. Complaints continued and he advanced a step, February 
22, 1579, by decreeing that for three years, in towns of upwards 
of five hundred hearths, familiars should be exempt from billeting 
and furnishing transportation; in smaller towns, one-half should 
be exempted and where there was but one he should be exempt. 
This was renewed frequently for three years at a time and as 


1 Archivo gén. de la C. de Aragon, Fondos del Concejo de Aragon, Leg. 708. 
? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Leg. 17, fol. 20.— 
_ Actos de Corte del Reyno de Aragon, fol. 96 (Zaragoza, 1664). 


398 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


frequently was overlooked, but this made little differenec, for 
we are told by an experienced inquisitor that it was always 
assumed to be in force and, when a familiar complained of a 
billet, the tribunal would issue a mandate ordering his relief 
within three hours under a penalty of 100,000 mrs.; if the 
exemption was in force, a copy of the cédula was included in 
the mandate, if it was not it still was quoted as existing in the 
archives of the tribunal.’ 

There were few questions which gave rise to more embroilment 
than this. Both sides were unscrupulous; the privilege excited 
ill-will, it was evaded by the authorities wherever possible and 
the tribunals were kept busy in defending their familiars with 
customary violence. At length, in 1634, the necessities of the 
state were pleaded by Philip IV as his reason for withdrawing 
all exemptions—a measure which he was obliged to repeat more 
than once.” It is somewhat remarkable therefore that, when the 
Cértes of Aragon, in 1646, succeeded in greatly abridging the 
privileges of familiars, they were included with the salaried offi- 
cials in the exemption from billets. This did not avail them 
much for we are told that, in the changes effected by the Cortes, 
the terror felt for the Inquisition was so greatly diminished that 
there was scant ceremony in imposing on its officials; that the 
familiars were singled out to have two or three soldiers quartered 
on them and when they complained the tribunal ventured no 
more than to instruct its commissioner to use persuasion.*® Cata- 
lonia was not so fortunate and strife continued with the usual 
bitterness. As a frontier province, in war time it was occupied 
with troops and there were abundant opportunities for friction. 
In 1695 the Diputados complained that, as the only mode of 
escaping billets was to become a familiar, many had themselves 
appointed, although there was already an innumerable multitude, 
and that even when the local magistrates were compelled to 
receive soldiers, the familiars refused, in contempt of the royal 
orders.* 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Libro 23, fol. 42; Leg. 1157, fol. 23—Modo de Pro- 
ceder, fol. 41-2 (Bibl. nacional, MSS., D, 122). 

? Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg 2, n. 18.—Archivo de 
Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 23, fol. 42. 

* Fueros y Actos de Corte, p. 12 (Zaragoza, 1647).—Bibl. nacional, MSS., D, 
118, fol. 122. 

* Archivo de Simancas, Libro 26, fol. 69; Libro 66, fol. 78.—Archivo de la C. 
de Aragon, Fondos del Concejo de Aragon, Leg. 708. 


Cuap. IIT] BILLETING TROOPS 399 


The War of Succession brought fresh necessities and the change 
of dynasty was unfavorable to the Inquisition in this as in so 
much else. A royal decree of February 11, 1706, abolished all 
exemptions but, as a favor to the Inquisition, four of its officials 
were excepted in towns and twenty in cities that were seats of 
tribunals. The Suprema accepted this cheerfully but, when a 
decree of January 19, 1712, revoked all exemptions, it remon- 
strated and was told that, while the king recognized the claims 
of the Inquisition to all the privileges granted by his predecessors, 
the existing urgency required the withdrawal of all exemptions 
and, as the law was absolute, he could make no exceptions. 
Although this covered the salaried officials, it seems to have been 
the familiars who complained the loudest; possibly now that the 
tribunals could no longer protect them they were exposed to 
special discrimination. It was a question of money, however, 
rather than of hardship, for a system of composition had been 
developed under which by paying the cuartel or utensilio—an 
assessment proportioned to the wealth of the individual—the 
billet was escaped.’ When the urgency of immediate peril was 
passed these decrees were either withdrawn or became obsolete. 
The claim of exemption revived and with it the active efforts 
of the tribunals to protect those whose exemptions were dis- 
regarded and to punish the officials who disregarded them.? 

In 1728 Philip V made a well-intentioned attempt to relieve 
the oppression of the poor arising from the numerous classes 
of officials who claimed exemption from the common burdens, 
including the billeting of troops. As for the familiars, he says, 
who all claim exemptions and give rise to disturbances, attacks 
on the local magistrates, with excommunications and other 
penalties, and perpetual competencias, all this must cease. Yet 
he admits their exemption and only insists that it must be 
confined to the number aliowed by the Concordia of 1553; that 
limitation had never been observed and the inquisitors had 
appointed large numbers in excess of it, in spite of perpetual 
remonstrance, and Philip now ordered that tribunals should not 
issue certificates to more than the legal number and should not 
take proceedings against the local magistrates.* As usual the 
royal orders were disregarded. The tribunal of Valencia threat- 


1 Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 2, n. 18. 
2 Tbidem, Legajo 390. 
8 Autos Acordados, Lib. vi, Tit. xiv, auto 4. 


400 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


ened with excommunication and fine the magistrates of Jativa 
and San Mateo, at the instance of some familiars on whom soldiers 
had been quartered, and, on learning this, Philip addressed the 
Suprema in 1729 stating that the records showed that familiars 
were entitled to no exemption; even if they were, the tribunal 
had exceeded its powers in employing obstreperous methods in 
defiance of the royal decrees. There must be no competencia; 
the Valencia tribunal must be notified not to exceed its juris- 
diction and the Suprema itself must observe the royal orders. 
After the delay of a month, the Suprema forwarded the royal 
letter to Valencia, sullenly telling the tribunal to report what 
could be done and not to act further without orders. 

For two centuries the Inquisition had been accustomed to 
obey or to disregard the royal decrees at its pleasure and to 
tyrannize over the local authorities. The habit was not easily 
broken and it was hard to conform itself to the new order of 
things. A formulary of about 1740 contains a letter to be sent 
to magistrates granting billets on familiars, couched in the old 
arrogant and peremptory terms and threatening excommunica- 
tion and a fine of two hundred ducats. Familiars, it says, are 
not to furnish quarters and beasts of burden, except in extreme 
urgency when no exemptions are permitted, and this it assumes 
to be in accordance with the royal decrees, including the latest 
one of November 3, 1737.2 I can find no trace of a decree of 
1737 and we may assume that it was this obstinacy of the Inqui- 
sition that induced Philip, in 1748, to reissue his decree of 1728 
with an expression of regret at its inobservance and the dis- 
astrous results which had ensued; he added that, when the houses 
of the non-exempt were insufficient for quartering troops, they 
could be billeted on hidalgos and nobles.* 

The Inquisition still adhered to its claims, but Carlos III 
taught it to abandon its comminatory style. When, in 1781, 
the authorities of Castellon de la Plana billeted troops on famil- 
iars, the Valencia tribunal adopted the more judicious method 
of persuading the captain-general that they were to be classed 
with hidalgos and he issued orders to that effect. This did not 
please Carlos III, who brushed aside the claim to exemption 
by a peremptory order that the familiars of Castellon de la Plana 


* Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Legajo 14, n. 2, fol. 9. 
? Ibidem, Legajo 299. 
* Autos Acordados, ubi sup. 


Cuar. IIT] BEARING ARMS 401 


should subject themselves to the local government in the matters 
of billets and that there should be no change until he should issue 
further commands.’ 

This would seem in principle to abrogate all claims to exemp- 
tion, but Spanish tenacity still held fast to what it had claimed 
and, in 1800, when José Poris, a familiar of Alcira, complained 
that the governor had quartered on him an officer of the regiment 
of Sagunto, the Valencia tribunal took measures for his relief.? 
The times were adverse to privilege, however, and in 1805 the 
Captain-general of Catalonia sent a circular to all the towns 
stating that familiars were not exempt. The magistrates accord- 
ingly compelled them to furnish quarters and beasts of burden, 
and, when the tribunal complained to the captain-general and 
adduced proofs in support of its claims, he responded with the 
decrees of 1729 and 1743, which he assumed to have abrogated 
the exemption and he continued to coerce the familiars. The 
same process was going on in Valencia and, when that tribunal 
applied to Barcelona for information and learned the result, it 
ordered its familiars to submit under protest. Then followed a 
royal cédula of August 20, 1807, limiting strictly what exemptions 
were still allowed; the Napoleonic invasion supervened and under 
the Restoration I have met with no trace of their survival.’ 


Another privilege which occasioned endless debate and con- 
tention was the right of officials and familiars to bear arms, 
especially prohibited ones. This was a subject which, during 
the middle ages, had taxed to the utmost the civilizing efforts 
of legislators, while the power assumed by inquisitors to issue 
licences to carry arms, in contravention of municipal statutes, 
was the source of no little trouble, especially in Italian cities.‘ 
The necessity of restriction, for the sake of public peace, was 
peculiarly felt in Spain, where the popular temper and the sen- 
sitiveness as to the pundonor were especially provocative of 
deadly strife. It would be impossible to enumerate the endless 


1 Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 4, n. 2, fol. 79; Leg. 16, 
n. 5, fol. 4. 

2 Ibidem, Varios, Leg. 392; Leg. 492, n. 27. 

3 Ibidem, Leg. 398; Cartas del Consejo, Leg. 17, n. 3, fol. 22. 

4 See the Author’s Inquisition of the Middle Ages, I, 382 sqq. 

5 See for example the Vida de D. Diego, Duque de Estrada (Mem. hist. espafiol, 


XII, 47). - 
6 


402 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


series of decrees which succeeded each other with confusing 
rapidity and the repetition of which, in every variety of form, 
shows conclusively how little they were regarded and how little 
they effected. Particular energy was directed against armas 
alevosas—treacherous weapons—which could be concealed about 
the person. In the Catalan Cortes of 1585, Philip II denounced 
arquebuses, fire-locks and more especially the small ones known 
as pistols, as unworthy the name of arms, as treacherous weapons, 
useless in war and provocative of murder, which had caused 
great damage in Catalonia and had been prohibited in his other 
kingdoms. They were therefore forbidden, not only to be carried 
but even to be possessed at home and in secret, and against this 
no privilege should avail, whether of the military class or official 
or familiar of the Inquisition or by licence of the king or captain- 
general, under penalty for those of gentle blood of two years’ 
exile, for plebeians of two years’ galley-service, and for French- 
men or Gascons of death, without power of commutation by 
any authority. Three palms, or twenty-seven inches of barrel, 
was the minimum length allowed for fire-arms in Catalonia and 
four palms in Castile. Philip IV, in 1668, even prohibited the 
manufacture of pistols and deprived of exemptions and fuero 
those who carried them, while as for poniards and daggers, Philip 
V, in 1721, threatened those who bore them with six years of 
presidio for nobles and six years of galleys for commoners.’ 

These specimens of multitudinous legislation, directed against 
arms of all kinds, enable us to appreciate how highly prized was 
the privilege of carrying them. In an age of violence it was 
indispensable for defence and was equally desired as affording 
opportunities for offence. That the Inquisition should claim 
it for those in its service was inevitable and it had the excuse, 
at least during the earlier period, that there was danger in the 
arrest and transportation of prisoners and in the enmities which 
it provoked, although this latter danger was much less than it 
habitually claimed. The old rules, moreover, were well known 
under which no local laws were allowed to interfere with 
such privilege,” and the Inquisition had scarce been established 
in Valencia when the question arose through the refusal of the 


1 Constitutions de Cathalunya, Lib. 1x, Tit. xix, cap. 3, 4 (Barcelona, 1588, 
p. 495).—Novis. Recop., Lib. x1, Tit. xix, leyes 2, 8, 15. 

* Michael Albert, Repertorium de Pravitate Hereticorum, s. v. Arma (Val- 
entiz, 1494). 


-Cuap. ITT] BEARING ARMS 403 


local authorities to allow its ministers to carry arms. Ferdinand 
promptly decided the matter in its favor by an order, March 22, 
1486, that licences should be issued to all whom the inquisitors 
might name—for the time had not yet come in which the in- 
quisitors themselves issued licences.’ Probably complaints arose 
as to the abuse of the privilege for the instructions of 1498, which 
were principally measures of reform, provided that, in cities, 
where bearing arms was forbidden, no official should carry them 
except when accompanying an inquisitor or alguazil.? As indicated 
by this, policy on the subject was unsettled and it so remained 
for a while. November 14, 1509, Ferdinand ordered that the 
ministers of the Sicilian Inquisition should not be deprived of 
their arms; June 2, 1510, he thanked the Valencia tribunal for 
providing that its officials should go unarmed, for, by the grace 
of God, there is no one now who impedes or resists the Inquisi- 
tion and, if there were, the royal officials or he in person will 
provide for it; then, in about three months, on August 28th, he 
wrote to the Governor of Valencia that the salaried officials 
of the tribunal, with their servants and forty familiars should 
enjoy all the prerogatives of the Holy Office and were not to be 
deprived of their arms.° 

We see in all this traces of general popular opposition to 
exempting inquisitorial officials from the laws forbidding arms- 
bearing. This was stimulated by the difficulty of preventing 
the exemptions from being claimed by unauthorized persons 
without limit, leading Catalonia, in the Concordia of 1512, to 
provide that officials bearing arms could be disarmed, like other 
citizens, unless they could show a certificate from the tri- 
bunal, and further that the number of familiars for the whole 
‘principality should be reduced to thirty, except in cases of 
necessity. Although this Concordia was not observed, Inquisi- 
-tor-general Mercader, in his instructions of August 28, 1514, 
admitted the necessity of such regulations by prohibiting the 
issue of licences to bear arms; by reducing the overgrown number 
of familiars to twenty-five in Barcelona and ten each in Perpignan 


1 Archivo gén. de la C. de Aragon, Regist. 3684, fol. 89. 

2 Instrucciones de 1498, 2 2 (Arguello, fol. 12). 

3 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 3, fol. 96, 125.--Bibl. nacional, 
_MSS., D, 118, fol. 20. 

4 Pragmaticas y altres Drets de Cathalunya, Lib. 1, Tit. viii, cap. 1, @ 16. 


404 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


and other towns, by permitting the disarmament of those who 
could not exhibit certificates and by endeavoring to check the 
fraud of lending these certificates by requiring them to swear not 
to do so and keeping lists whereby they could be identified.’ 

The right of arming its familiars, thus assumed by the 
Inquisition was by no means uncontested. We have seen how 
the Empress Isabella when in Valencia, in 1524, ordered the 
arms taken from them and broken, leading to a protest from 
Inquisitor-general Manrique, who asserted this to be a privilege 
enjoyed since the introduction of the Inquisition. In spite of 
this Charles V, by a cédula of August 2, 1539, ordered inquisitors 
to prohibit the use of arms by familiars.”. The matter remained 
a subject of contest for some years more. In 1553 there were 
quarrels concerning it between the Valencia tribunal and the 
local authorities, but the Concordia of 1554 admitted the right 
unreservedly.* 

By this time, in fact, it was generally recognized, but this, m 
place of removing a cause of discord only intensified and multi- 
plied it. The right to bear arms could scarce be held to include 
weapons which were prohibited to all by general regulations, yet 
the authorities had no jurisdiction over familiars to enforce 
them. Thus when flint-lock arquebuses were prohibited and the 
Viceroy of Valencia included familiars in a proclamation on the 
subject, in 1562, Philip II called him to account, telling him that 
the order must come from the inquisitors and, in 1575 he repeated 
this to the Viceroy of Catalonia. The Suprema might decide 
that familiars were included in prohibitory decrees and that 
inquisitors must issue the necessary orders, as it did, in 1596, 
with regard to one respecting daggers and in 1598 to one for- 
bidding fire-locks and pistols at night,® but the tribunals had no 
police to enforce these orders and, when the secular authorities 
undertook to do so, inquisitors were prompt to resent it, in their 
customary fashion, as a violation of the immunities of the Holy 


Office. 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 933. 

? Ibidem, Sala 40, Lib. 4, fol. 98.—Bibl. nacional, MSS., D, 118, fol. 20. 

$ Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 926, fol. 33.—Bibl. nacional, MSS., 
D, 118, fol. 20; D, 146.—MSS. of Bodleian Library, Arch. S, 130. 

This article however was omitted from the Valencia Concordia of 1568. 

4 Bibl. nacional, MSS., D, 118, fol. 20.—Portocarrero, 2 57. 

5 Bibl. nacional, MSS., D, 146.—Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valen- 
cia, Cartas del Consejo, Leg. 5, n. 2, fol. 76. 


is hi 


Cuap. III] BEARING ARMS 405 


Even more fruitful of trouble was the fact that it was impos- 
sible to make the inquisitors respect the limitations imposed by 
the Concordias on the number of familiars and consequently 
to obey the rule of furnishing lists of them to the authorities 
so that they might be known. Appointments were lavished 
ereatly in excess of all possible needs and without informing 
the magistrates—often, indeed, without keeping records in the 
archives. The familiar might or might not carry with him the 
evidence of his official character but, whether he did so or not, 
his arrest or disarmament was violently resented, and the ordinary 
citizen when caught offending was apt to claim that he was a 
familiar in hopes of being released. How exasperating to the 
civil authorities was the situation may be gathered from a case 
occurring in Barcelona, in 1568. The veguer, on his nightly 
rounds, arrested Franco Foix, whom he found armed with a 
coat of mail, sword, buckler and dagger. The culprit claimed 
to be a familiar and the veguer obediently handed him over to 
the tribunal. He proved not to be one, but, instead of returning 
him, the inquisitors fined him in forty-four reales for their own 
benefit (presumably as a penalty for personating an official) and 
restored to him his forfeited arms." When the laws were thus 
openly set at defiance, conditions were eminently favorable for 
quarrels, even without the violent mutual animosity every- 
where existing between the tribunals and the civil authorities; 
collisions were correspondingly frequent and were fought to the 
bitter end. 

It would be wearisome to multiply cases illustrating the 
various phases of these quarrels which occupied the attention 
of the king and his councils in their settlement. A single one will 
suffice to show the spirit in which they were conducted on both 
sides. In 1620, by order of the tribunal of Valencia, acting in 
its secular capacity and not in a matter of faith, the commissioner 
at Jdtiva arrested a man and sent him to Valencia under the 
customary guard of relays of familiars. One of these named 
Juan Lépez, armed with a prohibited flint-lock, was conveying 
him, on February 23d, when at Catarroja, about a league from 
the city, some armed alguaziles, in the service of Dr. Pedro 
Juan Rejaule, a judge on the criminal side of the Audiencia, 
arrested him, taking away his weapon and carrying him to Dr. 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Visitas de Barcelona, Legajo 15, fol. 20. 


406 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


Rejaule’s house. Disregarding his documents, Rejaule told him 
that he could not be released without giving bail to present 
himself to the viceroy and, as he was unable to furnish it, he 
was handed as a prisoner to the local magistrates. On learning 
the event the inquisitors applied to the regent of the Audiencia 
who ordered the release of Lépez, which was effected and Rejaule 
visited the tribunal, admitted that he had been in error, and 
promised in future to observe all necessary respect. In spite 
of this the inquisitors proceeded to try him for impeding the 
Inquisition, ordered him to keep his house as a prison under pain 
of three hundred ducats, and threw into the secret prison, as 
though they were heretics, the four alguaziles who had made 
the arrest. When notice of this was served on Rejaule he pro- 
tested that the inquisitors were not his judges and that he would 
appeal, whereupon the additional indignity was inflicted upon 
him of posting two guards in his house with orders to keep him 
in sight. 

This produced a crisis. The viceroy assembled in his palace 
all three salas or branches of the Audiencia, where the matter was 
fully discussed and it was resolved to release Rejaule and hold 
the two guards as hostages for the imprisoned alguaziles. At 
2 a.m. Dr. Morla went with halberdiers furnished by the viceroy, 
seized and handcuffed the guards and brought Rejaule to his 
brother judges. At the same time a scrivener of the court had 
been sent to the inquisitor Salazar with a message from the viceroy 
to the effect that, as the offence had not been in a matter of faith, 
Rejaule was justiciable only by the king; if the Inquisition held 
otherwise a competencia could be formed; the Audiencia had 
decided that Rejaule and the alguaziles must be released and 
the guards be held until this was done. The scrivener also 
presented a petition of appeal to the pope, or to whomsoever was 
judge, and demanded apostolos or letters to that effect. To this 
Salazar replied in writing that the arrests had been made for 
matters incident to and dependent upon affairs of the faith, in 
which the Inquisition had exclusive jurisdiction and could admit 
no competencia; he could say no more as to the cause of the 
arrests without violating the secrecy of the Inquisition and incur- 
ring excommunication and he begged the viceroy not to interfere 
in a matter concerning so greatly the service of God and the 
king. At 4 a.m. the scrivener returned with this reply to where 
the viceroy and judges were waiting. At the magic word “faith,” 


Cuap. IIT] BEARING ARMS 407 


however fraudulently employed, all opposition vanished. By 
six o’clock Dr. Morla had taken Rejaule back to his house and 
had replaced the guards and, at the same time, the scrivener 
bore to the inquisitors a note from the viceroy saying that, as 
they had certified that it was a matter of faith, the Audiencia had 
restored everything to its previous condition and he offered not 
only not to impede the Inquisition but to show it all aid and 
favor. 

The case was thus transferred to the court, where the Suprema 
on one side and the Council of Aragon on the other, struggled 
for a favorable decision from Philip III. The former evidently 
felt the weakness of the claim that the faith, was involved, but 
it argued that impeding the Inquisition in any way conferred 
jurisdiction on it and Aliaga, in his double capacity of inquisitor- 
general and royal confessor, added a bitter complaint as to the 
manner in which the Inquisition was abused and maltreated. To 
this the king replied that he wished the affair treated with the 
customary moderation and mercy of the Holy Office, especially 
as it was not directly a matter of faith, and whatever sentence 
the Suprema resolved upon for Rejaule and the other inculpated 
parties must be submitted to him before publication. Besides, 
he ordered a junta of two members each of the Suprema and 
the Council of Aragon to be formed and to devise a plan for the 
avoidance of future contention. This assumed Rejaule’s guilt 
and awarded the victory to the Suprema, but it was not satisfied 
and presented a consulta representing the perilous condition of 
the Valencia tribunal, which necessitated the punishment of the 
delinquents as a warning, but Philip merely repeated his former 
decision." 

What was Rejaule’s fate we have no means of knowing, but 
his career was evidently blasted, whatever may have been the 
so-called mercy exhibited. As for the perilous position of the 
tribunal insisted on by the Suprema, it seems to be set forth in a 
petition of the syndic of the College of Familiars, February 25, 
1616, complaining of arrests and ill-treatment and asking the 
tribunal to take evidence on the subject. It accordingly did so, 
but while the testimony was ample as to the existence of ill- 
feeling towards the familiars, in substance it amounted only to 
their being deprived at night of daggers and bucklers which 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 19, fol. 161; Libro 927, fol. 329. 


408 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


were prohibited weapons, and it does not appear that any action 
was taken in consequence. Complaints continued and another 
petition of October 30, 1626, asked that an envoy be sent to the 
Suprema, for which the familiars would defray the cost, for 
unless some relief was had they would resign in a body, as their 
position only exposed them to wrong and insult and their privi- 
leges were set at naught.’ 

The difficulty of enforcing the laws on the people was intensi- 
fied by the privileges claimed by the familiars. They were by 
no means peaceable folk and the unprivileged class naturally 
regarded it as a hardship to be restricted to the use of swords 
when these gentry were so much more efficiently armed. The 
Suprema as a rule supported its satellites. For ten years, from 
1574, it resisted, in Aragon, the enforcement on familiars of a 
royal decree against carrying prohibited weapons at night, 
although the Concordia of Aragon in 1568 provided that famil- 
iars should obey the laws respecting arms and that inquisitors 
should not protect them in violations. Members of all the Royal 
Councils were involved in the discussion, as though it were the 
weightiest affair of state and it was not until 1584 that the 
Suprema was induced to issue the necessary orders, which it was 
obliged to repeat in 1592. 

Another illustration of its attitude occurs with respect to a 
pragmatica of great severity against the use of fire-arms, issued 
by Philip III, March 14, 1613, pronouncing the mere discharge 
of a weapon to be a capital offence, whether death ensued or 
not. It abrogated all privileges and exemptions and conferred 
on the royal courts full jurisdiction in such cases, and all this 
was accepted and its observance enjoined by the Suprema. 
This met with such scant obedience that the Council of Aragon 
in a consulta of July 31, 1632, called the king’s attention to the 
evils existing from the exemption of familiars and suggested 
that they should not be permitted to decline the jurisdiction of 
the courts for crimes committed with fire-arms. It was doubtless 
in consequence of opposition by the Suprema that it was not 
until September 30, 1633, that Philip IV, in a cédula addressed 
to the Viceroy of Valencia, ordered that, with the assent of the 
Councils of Aragon and of the Inquisition, the pragmatica of 


1 Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 1, n. 6, fol. 48, 225. 
? Archivo gén. de la C. de Aragon, Leg. 528.—Actos de Corte del Reyno de 
Aragon, fol. 94 (Zaragoza, 1664).—Bibl. nacional, MSS., D, 146. 


Cuap. III] BEARING ARMS 409 


1613 must be strictly observed by which all exemptions were 
disallowed and offenders were triable and punishable by the 
royal courts; the Inquisition must withdraw from all pending 
competencias and the cases be carried to conclusion by the 
Audiencia. The Suprema must have consented unwillingly to 
this, for it labored with the wavering monarch and, on November 
8th, he wrote withdrawing the cédula and ordering the suspension 
of all cases before the Audiencia. A few weeks later he yielded 
to other influences and annulled the last letter, but added that 
his orders of September 30th must be executed impartially, 
for the Inquisition complained that it was enforced only against 
its officials and in such case he would give it a free hand again. 
December 27th the Suprema sent this to the Valencia tribunal 
with formal instructions to obey it, but added a confidential 
letter saying that efforts would not be relaxed to persuade the 
king to remit all such cases back to them; meanwhile an agree- 
ment had been obtained from the Council of Aragon that all 
sentences by the Audiencia should be referred to it before execu- 
tion and the tribunal must watch them closely and send such 
reports as would enable the Suprema to obtain favorable action 
on them." 

For this endless strife, for the habitual disregard of the laws 
by familiars, the Suprema was primarily responsible. It was 
perfectly acquainted with the innumerable edicts specifying 
prohibited weapons and forbidding the carrying of them after 
night-fall; it acquiesced, ostensibly at least, in the subjection 
of these offences to the royal courts and yet it encouraged famil- 
iars in the belief that it had power to override all laws and could 
confer licence to violate them. The formula of commission which 
it caused to be issued to familiars contained a clause granting 
them full liberty to carry arms, offensive and defensive, publicly 
and secretly, by day or by night, and ordering all secular officials 
to abstain from interference with them, in virtue of holy obedi- 
ence and under penalty of excommunication and of fifty thousand 
maravedis applicable to the expenses of the Holy Office.” It could 


1 Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 8, n. 2, fol. 405-7. 

2 Ibidem, Leg. 1, n. 3, fol. 49.—Bibl. nacional, MSS., D, 118, fol. 20; fol. 54, 
n. 21; Ibidem, D, 146. 

The commission as familiar issued March 7, 1642, by the tribunal of Toledo to 
Francisco de Gayeta of Madrid, says “y os damos licencia y facultad para que 
podais traer armas, asi ofensivas como defensivas, publica y secretamente, de 


410 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


not be fuller or more explicit; there are no exceptions as to the 
character of arms or allusion to the jurisdiction in these cases 
granted by the king to the royal courts. When one branch of the 
government thus resolutely placed itself in opposition to the sov-. 
ereign and encouraged its subordinates to resist the laws and the 
constituted authorities, peace was impossible and conflicts were 
inevitable. Yet the illegality of all this was admitted when, in 
1634, the familiars of Valencia held a meeting to assess themselves 
for a donation to be offered to the king, in return for a privilege 
to bear arms, and the Suprema instructed the tribunal to aid the 
movement, and again when, in 1638, a fruitless offer was made by 
them of twelve thousand ducats for the revocation of legislation 
on the subject.’ 

To crown all this, the Suprema, in 1657, reached the audacity 
of arguing that the right of familiars to bear arms was impre- 
scriptible and could not be abrogated by any prince, for it would 
impede the Inquisition in the free exercise of its functions, 
wherefore it denied that any competencia could be formed in 
such cases; the secular authorities had no jurisdiction and there 
could not even be a discussion about their claim to interfere.’ 
Philip IV had the weakness to submit to these extravagant claims, 
in 1658, and to decide that the Suprema alone had cognizance 
in such matters. The case in which this occurred was that of 
Jaime Espejo, alcaide of the penitential prison of Valencia, 
arrested for carrying pistols and it has interest for us because in 
it the inquisitor, Don Antonio de Ayala Verganza, argues away 
all the royal decrees and pragmAaticas as not meaning what they 
said and proves it by citing a vast number of cases in which, 
when carried up to the king, he overruled his own legislation, 
invariably deciding in favor of the Inquisition and against his 
own jurisdiction. He could sometimes be brought to issue 


dia y de noche, y mandamos en vertud de santa obediencia y so pena de excom- 
union mayor y de cincuenta mil mrs. para gastos desto Santo Oficio, 4 todas las 
dichas justicias y 4 sus alguaciles, executores y ministros no os toman las dichas 
armas ni os quebranten los dichos privilegios y exempciones de que los dichos 
familiares pueden y deben gozar, con sus personas y bienes, ni sobre ello os 
molesten ni ynquieten en manera alguna.’’ 

* Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 8, n. 2, fol. 407; Leg. 9, 
n. 1, fol. 4386, 476, 499. 

* This was sound inquisitorial law, as the Suprema proved by citing the 
authorities. See, for instance, Pegne Comment. 105 in Eymerici Director. P. 
m1 and Bordoni Sacrum Tribunal, cap. 40, Q, 16, n. 24. 


Cuap. IIT] BEARING ARMS 411 


wholesome general regulations, but, when it came to their exe- 
cution, the ever-present dread of interfering with the service 
of God overwhelmed him.’ 

Yet Philip promptly reversed himself for, in a despairing 
effort to put an end to these interminable quarrels, he was 
induced to issue a royal letter, December 23, 1659, declaring 
that the cognizance of infractions of the laws respecting pro- 
hibited arms lay with the royal jurisdiction and that no com- 
_ petencias should be formed in these cases. When this letter 
was alleged by the royal court, in the case then pending of Joseph 
Navarro, a familiar arrested for carrying a pistol, the Inquisition 
in reply airily cast aside the pragmatica of 16138, and its con- 
firmation in 1633, by asserting that both before and after those 
laws it had always exercised jurisdiction over these cases, as 
was notorious to every one—which was all doubtless true. As 
for the recent letter of 1659, it had not been issued with the assent 
of the Suprema; being thus irregularly issued it should not be 
regarded as valid, until the king should be supplicated to modify 
it, and until this was done the accused should be surrendered to 
it or he could be released under bail to both jurisdictions. The 
vacillating monarch probably yielded again; whether he did so 
or not mattered little to the Holy Office, which regarded his 
decrees so lightly. The miserable business of quarrelling over 
the multiplication of the laws went on and, in 1691, Carlos II 
found it necessary again to prohibit the carrying of pistols and 
armas cortas and to deprive offenders of their claims to jurisdic- 
tion, even if they were familiars or salaried officials of the Inqui- 
sition. 

Several cases in the earlier years of Philip V seem to indicate 
that this matter was an exception to the general limitation of 
the privileges of the Holy Office and that there was a tendency 
to admit its claims.‘ Their final extinction, however, was not 
far off. In 1748, Fernando VI prohibited all officials of tribunals, 
including the Inquisition, from carrying cut-and-thrust weapons 
of any kind; exclusive jurisdiction in the enforcement of this 
was reserved for the secular courts and all claims to /uero 
were abolished. He confirmed and extended this by proclama- 


1 Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 1, n. 3, fol. 49-69. 

2 Tbidem. 

5 Bibl. nacional, MSS., R, 102, fol. 142. 

* Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 1, n. 3, fol. 49, 59, 64. 


AT? PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


tions of 1749, 1751 and 1754, with penalties of six years in the 
mines for commoners and six years’ service in presidio for nobles. 
In another of 1757 he regretted the non-observance of these 
laws and ordered their irremissible enforcement without privi- 
lege of fuero. This legislation was supplemented by Carlos III, 
in 1761, who included in the prohibition all fire-arms of less than 
four palms length of barrel, although he conceded to gentlemen 
the use of holster pistols when on horseback but not when on 
mule-back.1 Yet the Inquisition continued to issue the old 
form of commissions granting unlimited license, until the magis- 
trates of Seville and Alcala’ la Real refused to recognize them 
when, in 1777, it admitted its altered position by a modification 
which granted the right to carry non-prohibited weapons, but 
only when on duty for the Holy Office, and contented itself 
with exhorting the secular authorities not to interfere with this.’ 


In somewhat ludicrous contrast with the belligerent spirit, 
indicated by the earnest desire to carry arms, was the claim 
that all connected with the Inquisition were exempt from military 
service. In its relations with the State the Holy Office recog- 
nized no duties of citizenship; it only claimed privileges. That 
the salaried officials, regularly employed in the tribunals, should 
enjoy such exemptions was merely in accordance with old custom, 
for a law of Juan II, in 1482, specifically released from the obli- 
gation of service nearly all officials, including even physicians, 
surgeons and schoolmasters.* That this should apply to the 
Inquisition seems to have been assumed as a matter of course 
in its early days but, in 1560, the corregidor of Cérdova sum- 
moned the officials and familiars to appear in the musters; 
_ they all claimed exemption, when the inquisitor-general upheld 
the appeal of the officials but denied that of the familiars. 
Similar questions arose in Murcia in 1563 and 1575, in which 
a similar distinction was drawn.‘ In Valencia, the familiars had 
probably been more successful, for an article in the Concordia 
of 1568 provides that they must serve their turns in guarding 
the coasts and that inquisitors shall not defend them in seeking 


’ Novis. Recop., Libro x11, Tit. xix, leyes 16-19. 

? Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 15, n. 11, fol 45. 

3 Nueva Recop. Libro v1, Tit. iv, ley 7. 

* Archivo de Simancas, THGniniGione Libro 979, fol. 26.—Bibl. nacional, MSS., 
D, 118, fol. 20. 


Cuap IIT] MILITARY SERVICE 413 


exemptions under pretext of their office." The same question 
arose in Majorca and was settled by a law providing that famil- 
iars refusing to perform guard-duty on their appointed days 
could be compelled by the royal officials? Thus by common 
consent at this time salaried officials were exempted while the 
claims of familiars were rejected. 

In the troubles of the seventeenth century, when the very 
existence of Spain was threatened, the question as to officials 
as well as familiars came up again and the Suprema sought to 
protect both classes. In 1636 and 1638, the corregidors of 
various cities refused to except the officials when making up the 
lists for conscription, but Philip IV decided that they were ex- 
empt.? As the danger increased, in 1640, with the rebellions in 
Catalonia and Portugal, and the resources of the kingdom were 
strained to the utmost, all claims were disregarded. By a cédula 
of September 7, 1641, Philip declared this to be a religious war, 
as the rebels were allied with nations infected with heresy. In- 
quisitor-general Sotomayor was required to summon all officials 
and familiars to organize and serve and was clothed with power 
to enforce it. No protest was made against this, for it was a 
financial rather than a military move; arrangements were made 
to commute service for cash and the Suprema was thus aided 
in meeting the royal demands for contributions.‘ 

This was only a temporary truce. Philip, in a letter of Febru- 
ary 22, 1644/ to Inquisitor-general Arce y Reynoso, reported 
that the attitude of the officials had excited much dissatisfaction 
in Galicia; he therefore ordered that no exemptions be admitted 
and no excuses be received. To this the Suprema responded 
with bitter complaints that in Saragossa the lot had fallen on a 
messenger of the tribunal and the widow of a notary, who were 
told that they must furnish substitutes, all of which was in viola- 
tion of the privileges of the Inquisition, crippling it in its pious 
labors so essential to the faith and reducing it in popular esteem 
to a level with other institutions. Unstable as usual where the 
Holy Office was concerned, Philip abandoned his position and 
admitted that salaried officials were not liable to serve or to 


1 Valencia Concordia of 1568, Art. 14 (MSS. of Bodleian Library, Arch. §, 130). 

2 Ordinacions y Sumari dels Privilegis etc. del Regne de Mallorca, p. 323 (Mal- 
lorea, 1663). 

3 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 36, fol. 92, 98. 

4 Ibidem, Libro 49, fol. 240; Libro 23, fol. 42. 


414 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II. 


furnish substitutes, which the Suprema promptly conveyed to 
the tribunals, cautioning them not to employ excommunication 
in collisions with the royal officials until after obtaining its per- 
mission.’ 

Even in this hour of supreme need the liability of familiars 
was contested. Philip endeavored to placate the Suprema by 
assigning them to garrison duty, but it remonstrated, asserting 
that the Inquisition could not perform its functions if wholly 
deprived of them, and the cause of religion was higher than any 
other. It therefore asked that no place should be left without 
one, in small towns there should be two and in larger places 
four. To this Philip assented, on condition that those exempted 
should contribute to those who served, but the Suprema de- 
murred; every one could avoid service who could pay the assess-: 
ment, so this would be giving the familiars no special privileges; 
there could be no question that favors shown to the Inquisition 
would contribute to success in the war, for experience had demon- 
strated that the more sovereigns had fostered it the more fortu- 
nate they had been. However just was the argument it was 
fruitless; Philip adhered to his decision, but when the correspond- 
ing decrees were issued, the Council of Castile remonstrated in 
its turn and the distracted monarch was involved in a fresh 
discussion between the two.’ 

The Suprema carried its point that those exempted should 
not contribute to those conscripted and the arrangement re- 
mained in force. It was repeated in a carta acordada of January 
14, 1668, and, when, in 1681, a question arose in Tembleque, the 
Suprema cautioned the Toledo tribunal not to issue more letters 
of exemption than the settlement permitted, in order to avoid 
competencias which only serve to render the Holy Office hateful 
and to imperil its other privileges.* Carlos III seems to have 
been more liberal when, in 1767, he included, in an elaborate 
list of those exempt from military service, the ministers and de- 
pendents of the Inquisition who were relieved from billets under 
the decree of May 26, 1728, which, it will be remembered, granted 
the privilege to the number of familiars allowed under the old 


? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 36, fol. 5, 92.—MSS. of Royal Library 
of Copenhagen, 218b, p. 222. 

2 Tbidem, Libro 23, fol. 42; Libro 49, fol. 270. 

* Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Toledo, Legajo 498.—MSS. of Royal 
Library of Copenhagen, 218, p. 182. 


Cuap. IIT] RIGHT TO HOLD PUBLIC OFFICE 415 


Concordias. Carlos IV was more exacting for, in 1800, when 
regulating the conscription in minute detail, he granted exemption 
only to the titular officials and took special care to exclude famil- 
iars and other dependents.’ This continued to the end. Sep- 
tember 14, 1818, the Suprema communicated to the tribunals 
a decision of the king that, in order to secure exemption from 
conscription, it was not necessary to exhibit a royal commission, 
but one from the inquisitor-general or Suprema sufficed? Evi- 
‘dently the local tribunals were no longer allowed to issue certifi- 
cates of exemption. 


The right of officials and familiars to hold secular offices 
raised questions that caused no little debate. It was evidently 
of advantage to the Inquisition that those who were bound to 
it and enjoyed its exemptions should be in positions of in- 
fluence where they could guard its privileges and promote their 
extension. On the other hand, for these very reasons, the people 
were jealous of office-holding by its ministers and dreaded to 
have their local authorities relieved of responsibility through 
their claim on the fuero or jurisdiction of the Inquisition. Had 
these local positions been elective, popular good sense could 
‘have averted the danger, but they were awarded by lot, the names 
‘of those deemed eligible being placed in a bolsa or bag—a process 
‘known as insaculacion—and drawn forth.* 

The earliest instance I have met of a refusal to include officials 
-of the Inquisition among the eligibles occurs in 1503, when 
Ferdinand wrote to his Lieutenant-general of Majorca that he 
‘was astonished to learn that the names of Pere Prat, his son 
Pere Prat, Carman Litra and Gerénimo Serma had not been in- 
sacculated because they held office in the Inquisition; it should 
rather be a recommendation; they must not be thus dishonored 
and their names must at once be put in the bolsa.* Doubtless 
Ferdinand’s watchfulness preserved this privilege for officials 
during his life, but subsequently popular feeling must have 
manifested itself by their exclusion, for, in 1523, Charles V for- 


1 Novis. Recop., Lib. v1, Tit. vi, ley 7, 2 2; ley 14, cap. 35, 22 4, 28, n. 7. 

2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 559. 

3 For the elaborate process of insaculacion in Catalonia, which amounted, in 
some degree, to a primary election, see Capitols de Cort de 1585, cap. 5, 6, 71, 72 
(Barcelona, 1685, fol. 5-9, 46). 

* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 67, fol. 22; Libro 68, fol. 59. 


416 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Book II 


bade it in an edict and he followed this by a special pragmatica, 
May 30, 1524, asserting their eligibility to public office in all 
his dominions and for all future time, under pain of the royal 
wrath and of two thousand florins, but he provided that they 
should not be entitled to the jurisdiction of the Inquisition for 
official malfeasance.’ Notwithstanding this, Philip II was obliged 
to issue special instructions on the subject to Sardinia in 1552 
and to Navarre in 1558. 

In this, as in so much else, the Catalans were especially in- 
tractable. Cdrtes of the three kingdoms of Aragon were held 
in 1553, in which Catalonia alone took up the matter and 
adopted a law, confirmed by Prince Philip, prescribing that no 
bayle or his lieutenant, or judge, or scrivener could be a familiar, 
nor could he accept office after his term of service had expired.* 
This received scant obedience, nor did the Inquisition pay atten- 
tion to the clause in the pragmatica of 1524 depriving it of cog- 
nizance of official malfeasance. One of the complaints of the 
royal Audiencia to de Soto Salazar, in his visitation of the 
Barcelona tribunal in 1566, was that it assumed jurisdiction 
in all such cases. Salazar recommended that this should be 
forbidden, for it impeded the proper administration of the 
towns, and officials could not be punished for violating local 
ordinances about bread, vineyards, meadows, breaking irrigat- 
ing canals to water their lands, and multitudinous other derelic- 
tions.* 

Catalonia refused to accept the Concordia of 1568 and, in 1585, 
the Cértes re-enacted the provisions of 1553 in an enlarged form, 
including almost all offices, and subjecting violation to a penalty 
of two hundred ducats, which was confirmed by Philip II.2 This 
seems to have been enforced for, in 1586, a memorial from the 
Bishop of Segovia says that in Catalonia the names of all officials. 
of the Inquisition were removed from the lists of eligibles, that 
commissioners and familiars were resigning and that every day 
withdrawals were received from applicants, so that the tribunal 
would be crippled and the Cértes could have contrived nothing 


* Portocarrero, op. cit., 357.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 68, fol. 
61; Libro 919, fol. 59; Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Legajo 17, fol. 60. 

2 Ibidem, Libro 919, fol. 58, 60, 65. 

* Constitutions de Cathalunya, Lib. 1, Tit. lvi, cap. 15. 

* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Leg. 17, fol. 20. 

* Constitutions de Cathalunya, Lib. 1, Tit. lvi, cap. 16. 


Cuap. III] RIGHT TO HOLD PUBLIC OFFICE 417 


more damaging. The Catalans held good, despite the earnest 
efforts of the Holy Office, which declared long afterwards that 
this was the severest blow that it had ever received. In the 
Cértes of 1599 the battle was renewed after elaborate prepara- 
tions by the inquisitors. On June 30th the king presented a 
series of articles, in response to those submitted to him by the 
Cortes, and among them was one declaring officials and familiars 
eligible to all offices, but the Catalans would have none of it. 
In the elaborate memorial presented to Clement VIII by the 
Suprema against the work of the Cértes, it complained bitterly 
of the laws of 1553 and 1585 as diminishing notably the authority 
of the Inquisition and causing great lack of officials, so many 
having ignominiously resigned, while others could not be found 
to replace them.? 

Again, when the Cortes were about to assemble in 1626, the 
Barcelona tribunal implored the Suprema to use its utmost 
exertions for the repeal of the law of 1585, for no person of 
consideration would accept office and it was obliged to appoint 
those of low condition, which was fatal to its authority. The 
Cortes yielded in so far as to adopt an article throwing open 
the offices, provided incumbents were justiciable by the civil 
courts for a long series of offences, but the whole legislation of 
the Cortes came to naught through lack of the royal confirma- 
tion.2 When the question was coming up again in the Cértes 
of 1632, earnest appeals were made to the Suprema to have the 
obnoxious law of 1585 repealed. The condition of the Inquisi- 
tion in Catalonia was represented as most deplorable by reason 
of it. In a memorial to the king it was stated that in Barcelona 
there were but four or five familiars, and they were mechanics, 
ineligible to public office; there was not a single advocate of the 
accused, nor an ecclesiastical consultor, so greedy was every 
one for public office. Throughout the principality there was 
the same dearth—familiars only in miserable villages, destitute 
of tempting positions, and those were of base condition, for in 
fact the barons would endure none other in their lands. The 
Suprema was urged to bring the matter before the Rota and it 
submitted the question to its fiscal, but he wisely reported that, 


1 Archivo de Simancas, wbi sup., fol. 56. 
2 Ibidem, fol. 2, 28, 5. 
3 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Leg. 17, fol. 87, 10, 
92, 9. 
27 


418 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


although a favorable result was to be anticipated, yet it was not 
expedient to set the example of recourse to Rome which might 
result in other matters being carried thither with damage to the 
jurisdiction of the Holy Office.’ 

Thus Catalan pertinacity triumphed. When, in 1667, Pedro 
Momparler, familiar at Alconer, asked permission to resign, in 
order to accept the office of bayle, and his request was referred 
to the Suprema, it replied that it should be denied on account of 
the evil influence of his example, but it added that if he should 
renounce his familiarship before the royal justice for the term 
of his office, the inquisitors should pretend ignorance.’ 

In Majorca, frequent alterations of the law show that it was 
subject to active debate and that preponderance shifted from 
one side to the other. In 1637 it was decided that none of those 
connected with the Inquisition could hold public office; then, in 
1643, they were allowed to do so, in positions where they had 
not to vote or to give counsel; again, in 1660, the prohibition 
was made absolute; then, in 1662, royal letters of January 11th 
and March 4th removed the prohibition, provided they would 
previously renounce all claim to the jurisdiction of the Inquisi- 
tion. These letters afford a remarkable illustration of the vacil- 
lation of the monarch and of the extent to which bureaucracy 
had crippled his autocracy—only this time it was the Council 
of Aragon which imitated the methods of the Suprema. The 
latter body was dissatisfied with the arrangement and addressed 
to the king a consulta, April 5, 1663, asking its suspension and 
that a junta of the two councils should be called to consider 
the subject. Philip promptly acceded and, on April 10th, 
ordered the Council of Aragon to write to that effect to the viceroy. 
The command was not obeyed and, on September 19th, the 
Suprema asked him to remedy the omission, whereupon he asked 
the council to state its reasons and, on its doing so, he again 
ordered it, October 3d, to execute his decree of April 10th. It 
was still recalcitrant and, on March 19, 1664, the Suprema 
represented the delay to the king who the next day called upon 
the council to render an exact account of what it had done. It 
replied that in conformity with his commands it had written 
on October 3, 1663, copy of which it enclosed. This proved to 
be merely copies of the letters of 1662 which had given rise to 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inq. de Barcelona, Cértes, Leg. 17, fol. 2, 9, 14. 
? Libro XIII de Cartas, fol. 215 (MSS. of American Philosophical Society). 


Cuap. III] RIGHT TO HOLD PUBLIC OFFICE 419 


the debate, showing that it had deliberately nullified his orders. 
In view of all this the Suprema, July 24, 1664, asked the king 
to insist on literal compliance and that a copy of the despatch 
of the Council of Aragon to the viceroy should be furnished to 
it. This proved to be merely a duplicate of that of October 13, 
1663, with the date altered to April 6, 1664. Then the Suprema 
again asked the king peremptorily to order exact obedience 
and he replied that he had done so. Meanwhile the Viceroy 
and the inquisitor of Majorca had been playing at cross-purposes 
in consequence of the contradictory despatches received by each." 
Such a method of carrying on an organized government seems 
incredible and, trivial as was the question at issue, a case such 
as this throws light on one of the causes of Spanish decadence. 
The question itself, after all this trouble, apparently remained 
unsettled, for, in 1673, there was a competencia over Gabriel 
Berga, a knight of Santiago and a familiar, when the tribunal 
contended that he could not renounce its jurisdiction.’ 

It would be superfluous to follow out in detail the vicissitudes 
of this matter in the other provinces of Spain, where it gave 
abundant occasion for quarrels conducted with customary vehe- 
mence. It seems to have settled itself into the rule that officials 
and familiars were eligible to public office but that, during their 
terms of service, they were not entitled to the jurisdiction of the 
Inquisition. Such, we are told in 1632, was the practice in 
Castile, Aragon and Valencia.’ Yet still there were disputes for, 
about the middle of the seventeenth century, a formula is given 
for use when a familiar is prevented from taking office. This sets 
forth at much length that, if familiars are refused office, no one 
will take the position, which will inflict great detriment on the 
faith; it cites the royal cédulas, it sets aside opposing arguments 
by showing that for all malfeasance in office the familiar will 
be subject to the royal jurisdiction and finally it orders his 
immediate induction in his post under penalty of excommunica- 
tion and of five hundred ducats; no further notice will be given 
and all further action will be published in the halls of the Inqui- 
sition, which will be full legal notice to all parties concerned.‘ 


_ ? Ordinacions del Reyne de Mallorca, p. 297.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisi- 
ion, Libro 68, fol. 98; Libro 69, fol. 97. 

2 TIbidem, Libro 68, fol. 32, 97, 224. 

’ Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Leg. 17, fol. 9. 

* Modo de Proceder, fol. 40 (Bibl. nacional, MSS., D, 122). 


420 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


T have met with no further legislation on the subject and pre- 
sumably some arrangement of this kind was in force to the end. 


It was highly inconsistent but, at the same time, thoroughly 
in keeping with the spirit of the Inquisition in its dealings with 
the public, that while it vindicated so energetically the right 
of its officials to hold honorable and lucrative posts, it claimed 
for them the privilege to refuse to serve in those which were 
onerous. In the municipalities there were a certain number of 
these latter, entailing unremunerative labor and responsibility, 
which no one could refuse to accept when his name was drawn 
from the bolsa. The officials claimed to be insaculated for the 
desirable positions but not for the undesirable ones. That such 
a, claim could be made and sustained is a forcible illustration of 
the power of the Inquisition. 

There is no allusion to this in the earlier Concordias and no 
specific grant that I have been able to find. It seems to have 
been merely a gratuitous assumption on the part of the Inqui- 
sition, asserted with its customary persistence. A noteworthy 
case growing out of it occurred, in 1622, in the town of Lorca 
(Murcia) where a familiar refused to serve in the office of collector 
of the alcavala, or tax on sales, and was imprisoned for contu- 
macy. The inquisitors of Murcia demanded his liberation and 
excommunicated the alcalde mayor for refusing to obey. This 
failing, they prepared to arrest him and called upon the corregidor 
of Murcia, Pedro de. Porres, for assistance. On his refusal they 
excommunicated him and then laid an interdict on the city of 
Murcia. The citizens appealed to their bishop, Fray Antonio 
Trejo, who remonstrated with the tribunal and, finding this un- 
availing, issued an edict declaring the interdict invalid. Bishops 
were not subject to inquisitorial jurisdiction, even for heresy, 
without special papal faculties, but the inquisitor-general, Andres 
Pacheco, was the most audacious and inexorable assertor of in- 
quisitorial omnipotence and he did not hesitate to condemn the 
episcopal edict, to publish the condemnation in all the churches, 
to fine the bishop in eight thousand ducats and to summon him, 
under pain of four thousand more, to appear within twenty days 
and answer to the action brought against him by the fiscal as an 
impeder of the Inquisition. The bishop and chapter sent the 
dean and a canon to represent them, but, without a hearing, 
they were thrown incomunicado into the secret prison, excom- 


Cua. III] RIGHT 10 REFUSE OFFICE 421 


municated and the censure published in all the churches. The 
inquisitors imprisoned the parish priest of Santa Catalina for 
disregarding the interdict and the whole ecclesiastical body of 
Murcia became involved. Finally, through the intervention of 
the king and the pope, the bishop was absolved, but the Inquisi- 
tion reaped a rich harvest of fines. Those of the bishop, dean 
and some of the canons were kept by the Suprema, while the 
local tribunal, in addition to inflicting terms of exile, of from 
one to eight years, secured from José Lucas, the episcopal secre- 
tary, a thousand ducats, from Alonso Pedrifian, the fiscal, eight 
hundred and, from thirteen other priests and dignitaries of the 
church, sums ranging from fifty to one hundred and fifty—in all, 
an aggregate of 3272 ducats.’ 

A claim enforced so relentlessly was dangerous to dispute and 
even the Aragonese Concordia of 1646, which registered a triumph 
over the Holy Office, admitted the right of salaried officials and 
familiars to decline onerous offices.2, In time, however, there 
seems to have come a slight modification of the claim. About 
1750 we have the formula of a mandate, issued at the instance 
of a familiar, forbidding, under pain of excommunication and 
of two hundred ducats, the authorities of a town from including 
him among those liable to serve in any of the minor offices, 
nor in any of the more important ones until every other inhabi- 
tant has served his turn.’ 


It is not difficult to understand the origin of the claim that the 
buildings of the Inquisition and the houses of its officials were 
sanctuaries into which the officers of justice could not penetrate 
without special permission. The asylum afforded to criminals 
in churches was an old established practice throughout Europe 
to which Spain was no exception. Even as late as 1737 the papal 
sanction was deemed necessary to except from this certain 
crimes, such as murder, highway robbery and high treason.* 
Asylum was also afforded by the feudal rights which debarred 
royal officers of justice from intruding on lands of nobles, and 
the withdrawal of this right in Granada is cited as one of the 


1 Llorente, Hist. crit. Cap. xxv, Art. ii, n. 11—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisi- 
cion, Libro 918, fol. 1053. 

? Fueros y Actos de Corte en Zaragoza, 1645-6, pp. 11-12 (Zaragoza, 1647) 

’ Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 299. 

* Novis. Recop., Lib. 1, Tit. iv, ley 4. 


422, PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


causes of the agitation leading to the rebellion of 1568.1 In 
Aragon this was developed so far that a law of Jaime I, in the 
Cértes of Huesca in 1247, which still continued in force, gave 
to the houses of infanzones, or gentlemen, the same right of 
asylum as that possessed by churches.’ 

It is therefore somewhat remarkable that the claim of afford- 
ing asylum was not made at the outset by the Inquisition, espe- 
cially in view of the importance attached to the secrecy which 
shrouded all its operations. Yet, until the middle of the sixteenth 
century, such claims when made were authoritatively repudiated. 
Inquisitor-general Tavera writes, September 3, 1540, a sharp 
letter to the inquisitors of Seville saying that he is informed that 
recently certain murderers had been received and protected in 
the castle of Triana, occupied by the tribunal, and that the 
officers of the royal justice had not been allowed to search for 
them; the punishment of delinquents should be in no way im- 
peded and no occasion be given for complaint; the gates of the 
castle must be kept shut so that criminals cannot take refuge 
there.2 So, in 1546, among instructions from the Suprema to 
the tribunal of Granada, is an order that no criminals or debtors 
shall find refuge in the Inquisition, nor be allowed to sleep there 
nor between the gates; the janitor must eject them and, if they 
will not go, report it to the inquisitors for proper action.‘ This 
shows that the abuse was commencing but that it was disap- 
proved and the same is seen in the Valencia Concordia of 1554, 
which says that, as the Inquisition has no privileges as an asylum, 
it cannot protect those who take refuge there.® 

Evidently the local tribunals were claiming a right which the 
central authority disallowed; they were moreover claiming it 
not only for the building of the Inquisition but for the houses 
of officials and familiars. Among the malfeasances of the Barce- 
lona tribunal, reported in 1567 by de Soto Salazar, were cases of 
this kind. When the bayle of Perpignan sought to arrest some 
culprits they were sheltered by Pedro de Roca, a familiar, in 
his house and he resisted the bayle who came with a posse to 


* Mendoza, Guerra de Granada, p. 71 (Ed. Ribadeneira). 

? Fueros del Reyno de Aragon, Lib. 1, Tit. De his qui ad ecclesias (Zaragoza, 
1624). 

* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 13, fol. 120. 

* Ibidem, Libro 926, fol. 33. 

* MSS. of Bodleian Library, Arch. S, 130. 


Cuap. IIT] RIGHT OF ASYLUM 423. 


arrest them; Roca accused the bayle and his men for this; they 
were imprisoned for a long while by the Barcelona inquisitors and 
were condemned to fines and exile. So when the bayle of Sens, with 
a posse, broke into the house of Vicente Valele, who was merely a 
temporary commissioner, to arrest some culprits who had taken 
refuge there, he accused them and they were all imprisoned.’ 
The rapidity with which the abuse developed in Valencia is 
manifested by a comparison of the Concordias of 1554 and 1568. 
The former, as we have seen, admits that the Inquisition could 
offer no asylum, while the latter is obliged to forbid the lower 
officials and familiars from putting the arms of the Inquisition 
on their houses; all such must be removed and their houses shall 
not have immunity from the officers of justice—evidently the 
officials found profit in harboring thieves and murderers and 
the tribunal supported them.’ In Barcelona a sort of compromise: 
was reached by which, on application to the tribunal, one of its 
ministers was sent with the officers of justice to enter houses of 
officials where criminals had taken refuge, but the Cértes of 1599: 
complained that this delay afforded time for escape and, in the 
abortive Concordia enacted there, a clause provided that this: 
should not be necessary and that, in case of resistance, houses. 
could be entered. It shows how slow was the Suprema to assert: 
a right of asylum that, in its protest to Clement VIII, it accepts 
this article on the ground that the Inquisition never has impeded 
the pursuit and arrest of malefactors.* In time, however, it 
overcame these scruples and, in 1632, it issued repeated orders 
that the officers of justice should not be allowed to enter the 
houses of officials. Philip IV countermanded this, but the 
Suprema presented a consulta saying that there was no objection 
when the pursuit was flagrante delicto; prisoners, however, were 
frequently confined in the houses of officials and an unlimited 
right of entry might be abused to obtain communication with 
them in violation of the all-important secrecy of the Holy Office. 
As usual, the vacillating monarch yielded and, in 1634, issued a 
decree restricting the right of search to cases of hot pursuit.‘ 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Visitas de Barcelona, Leg. 15, fol. 20. 

2 MSS. of Bodleian Library, Arch. §, 130. 

8 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Leg. 17, fol. 28.— 
Constitutions del Cort de 1599, Const. 50 (Barcelona, 1635, fol. xvii). 

4 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 32, fol. 109.—Archivo hist. nacional, 
Inquisicion de Toledo, Leg. 498. 


424 PRIVILEGES AND EXEMPTIONS [Boox II 


It is remarkable that the Aragonese Concordia of 1646, im- 
posed by the Cortes on Philip, which in so many ways restricted 
the privileges of the Inquisition, recognized this doubtful one 
in the fullest manner. As the ministers, it says, of so holy an office 
should enjoy certain honors and pre-eminence, it orders that 
they, including familiars, shall have as to their houses the same 
privileges as caballeros and hijosdalgo—which, as we have seen, 
included the right of asylum.’ As regards the buildings of the 
Inquisition itself, a scandalous case occurring in 1638 shows how 
far it had travelled since Tavera rebuked the tribunal of Seville. 
In Majorca the Count of Ayamano, at the head of a band of 
assassins, committed the sacrilege of escalading the walls of a 
convent for the purpose of murdering his wife who had sought 
refuge there. Philip ordered every effort made to arrest him and 
his accomplices, but he escaped to Barcelona with eight of them 
and all found asylum in the Inquisition, in the apartments of his 
uncle, the Inquisitor Cotoner. It affords a curious insight into 
the conditions of the period to see that this created a situation 
impenetrable to the highest authorities of the land. Philip 
called a junta of two members each of the Suprema and Council 
of Aragon to devise how the criminals could be captured without 
scandal or quarrel with the Inquisition. The result of their delib- 
erations seems to be a letter from the Suprema to Cotoner telling 
him that, if he wanted to help his nephew, it should be outside 
and not inside of the Inquisition, in order to avoid the troubles 
ensuing on an attempt of the royal officers to remove him. The 
imperturbable Cotoner was not to be scared by this gentle warning 
and a fortnight later the Suprema enclosed to him a royal decree 
telling him that he would see the untoward results of sheltering 
his nephew. As complete satisfaction was demanded he was 
ordered to report in full all details, including his motives in 
harboring one who was put to the ban, especially when the latter 
was not a familiar.2. Unfortunately we do not know how the 
affair ended, but when the Suprema, in place of dismissing Cotoner, 
inquired as to his motives, we may assume that the asylum offered 
by the Inquisition saved the forfeit life of the criminal by some 
compromise. 

The immunity of the houses of officials became generally 
recognized, with the proviso that permission of search would be 


1 Fueros y Actos de Corte, p. 11 (Zaragoza, 1647). 
? Bibl. nacional, MSS., X, 157, fol. 244. 


Cuap. IT] RIGHT OF ASYLUM 425 


granted by inquisitors if special application was made to them, 
when they preserved their jurisdiction by sending one of their 
people to accompany the officers of justice. An exception which 
proved the rule however was made in favor of the administrators 
of the tax on tobacco, to whom general letters were given em- 
powering them to search the houses of officials for contraband 
tobacco. Even this was argued away by the Suprema in 1728, 
when it asserted that semi-proof in advance was necessary to 
justify search and full proof to give jurisdiction.’ 


It is evident from the above that the Holy Office, with its 
claims for special privileges and exemptions and its methods for 
enforcing their recognition, was a very disturbing factor in the 
body politic. Yet the greatest source of conflict lay in the ex- 
clusive jurisdiction which it sought to establish over all who 
were connected with it, not only between themselves but between 
them and the rest of the community. This engrossed so large 
a portion of its activity and was the cause of such perpetually 
recurring trouble that its consideration requires a chapter to 
itself. 


1 Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 1, n. 3, fol. 16, 406.— 


* Bibl. nacional, MSS., R, 102, fol. 169. 


; be . Li Ke aa 
&i nee $s 5 ee ry 


a ‘ J 
eer tt panes via) vn 
Curae ae. ar 


<\ iy . * AA 
ive |b ¥, iyi xa ig ic vi He) Day 


| rf 
" cy ose rit ad ; ay f fae 


GAS aN 
CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS. 


THE principal source of strife between the Inquisition and the 
other authorities arose from its claim to exclusive competence 
in all cases involving those connected with it and their dependents. 
This gave rise to perpetual conflicts, conducted with the utmost 
tenacity, which filled the land with confusion and, in many cases, 
rendered the administration of justice a mockery. For two 
centuries the monarchs vainly endeavored to keep the peace by 
repeated efforts to define the boundaries between the rival juris- 
dictions and the methods of settling their differences. The tire- 
less efforts, on the one side, of the Holy Office to extend its 
authority and increase its emoluments caused it constantly to 
violate compacts, while the jealousy of the civil magistracy on 
the other and its natural desire to repel intrusion rendered it 
prompt to use whatever means lay in its power. The struggle 
was unequal against the superior weapons furnished by papal 
faculties and against the royal favor which was with the Inqui- 
sition, but the conflict was maintained with marvellous con- 
stancy, supported by popular sympathy, and the time of the 
king and his advisers was frittered away in deciding a continuous. 
stream of petty quarrels, growing out of trivial incidents, but 
assuming portentous proportions through the violent methods. 
which had aggravated them. 

To understand the claim of the Inquisition to exclusive cog- 
nizance of the cases of its subordinates it is necessary to bear 
in mind the benefit of clergy, through which, from the early 
middle ages, all clerics were exempted from the jurisdiction of 
the laity and were subjected wholly to the spiritual courts. 
This amounted virtually to immunity for crime, both because 
those courts were debarred from rendering judgements of blood 
and because of the inevitable favoritism manifested to those: 
of their own cloth.’ As civilization advanced the disorders. 
caused by a class, thus emboldened in wrong-doing by impunity, 


1 T have considered this subject in some detail in ‘‘Studies in Church History,’”” 


pp. 177 sqq. 
( 427 ) 


428 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


were the source of constant solicitude to rulers and were deplored 
by right-thinking churchmen. In this, Spain was no exception. 
In a project of instructions drawn up by a Spanish bishop for 
the delegates to the Lateran Council in 1512, the crimes and 
scandals perpetrated by married clerks and those in the lower 
orders, through expectation of immunity, are dwelt upon as 
reasons for a change; there were daily conflicts between the spir- 
itual and secular courts, leading to interdicts cast on cities, and 
some universal legislation by the Church was desirable. No 
such remedy was adopted, and when the Council of Trent gave 
promise of reform, the Spanish prelates, in contrast with the 
Inquisition, which made every effort to extend its jurisdiction 
over offenders, proposed in 1562 to the council that married clerks 
wearing secular habits should not enjoy protection from secular 
justice.” In 1544, Fernando de Aragon, when Viceroy of Valencia, 
declared that his principal trouble lay with the Church, of which 
the chief object was to protect evil-doers and liberate them from 
his justice, an opinion in which he was heartily seconded by the 
saintly Tomas de Vilanova, then recently appointed archbishop.? 

Yet the marked aversion in Spain to ecclesiastical encroach- 
ment led to repeated enactments restraining spiritual jurisdic- 
tion within strict limits. In a series of laws, dating from the 
fourteenth to the sixteenth century, Henry II, Juan IJ, Henry IV, 
Ferdinand and Isabella and Charles V endeavored by the severest 
penalties to repress its inevitable tendency to extend itself, 
whether by seizure of the persons or property of the laity or by 
entertaining cases between laymen. Ferdinand and Isabella, 
in 1493, even threatened half confiscation and perpetual exile 
from Spain for all who, under any pretext, aided ecclesias- 
tical judges in taking prisoners from secular officials or who 
assisted them in any way.* In addition to this was the recurso 
de fuerza through which appeal lay to the royal courts or to the 
Sala de Gobierno whenever the spiritual courts refused an appeal 
or heard secular cases or those in which laymen were concerned.® 


1 Breve Memoria (Dollinger, Beitrage zur politischen, kirchlichen u. Cultur- 
Geschichte, III, 207). 

* Le Plat, Monument. Concil. Trident., Tom. V, pp. 84, 565. 

3 Coleccion de Documentos, V, 83, 85.—See also Carranza, Comentarios sobre 
el Catechismo, fol. 230. 

* Ordenamientos Reales, Lib. m1, Tit. 1, leyes 4, 5 (Salmantice, 1560, pp. 790, 
793).—Novis. Recop., Lib. 11, Tit. i, leyes 6, 7, 8, 12; Lib. xu, Tit. xii, ley 6. 

® Novis. Recop., Lib. 11, Tit. ii, leyes 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 10, 11, 18, 22, 23. 


Cuar. IV] LATITUDE IN SECULAR AFFAIRS 429 


It is necessary to bear in mind this tendency and these restric- 
tions on ecclesiastical jurisdiction to estimate properly the lati- 
tude obtained by the Inquisition in purely secular affairs. 

Whether, at. its inception, the Inquisition enjoyed the pre- 
rogative of exclusive cognizance of cases involving its officials 
it would be impossible now to say. They were mostly laymen 
and as such were subject to the secular courts, while, in the 
popular opposition elicited by their proceedings, especially in the 
Aragonese kingdoms, there might be anticipated danger that 
they would be terrorized or prosecuted unless protected by being 
reserved for Judgement by their own tribunals. The earliest 
mandate to this effect that I have met is a cédula of Ferdinand, 
March 26, 1488, addressed tovall the officers of justice in Catalonia 
ordering them, under penalty of two thousand florins and the 
royal wrath, to take no cognizance of anything concerning the 
ministers and familiars of the Inquisition; all their acts in such 
cases are declared invalid, and any one whom they may have 
arrested is at once to be transferred to the tribunal, showing 
that, at least in Catalonia, no such exemption from secular justice 
had previously been recognized.* 

Yet in this unlimited decree Ferdinand had overlooked details 
which necessarily presented themselves in practice. Was this 
exemption from secular jurisdiction confined to the titulados 
y asalariados or did it extend to the unsalaried commissioners 
and familiars, receiving no pay, pursuing their customary avoca- 
tions and only called upon for occasional service? There was 
also a question about the servants of officials, for an abuse of the 
spiritual courts had included those of clerics. Then it might 
be asked whether the protection accorded to the person of the 
official extended to his property in civil suits, with the wide 
avenue thus opened to abuses of many kinds. There was, more- 
over, a well-settled principle of law that the accuser or plaintiff 
must seek the court of the defendant; if, in violation of this, the 
official could enjoy what was known as the active jfuero as well 
as the passive—that is, if he as plaintiff could bring suit or pros- 
ecution before his own tribunal—his power of offence would be 
vastly increased, together with his opportunities for tyrannizing 
over all around him. | 

These were questions which had to be decided. It would seem 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 32, fol. 19% 


430 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox IL 


that the inquisitors construed their powers in the most liberal 
fashion, giving rise to abuses which called for repression and a 
limitation of their jurisdiction. The reformatory Instructions 
of 1498, accordingly, order them not to defend officials and their 
servants in civil cases and only officials in criminal actions, a 
rule repeated in a carta acordada of May 4th of the same year.’ 
This excluded servants wholly and deprived officials of the juero 
in civil matters, but it was soon modified by Ferdinand, in a 
letter of January 12, 1500, to the Catalonia tribunal, ordering 
it not to interfere with the royal court in a certain suit, and ex- 
pressing the rule that the plaintiff must seek the court of the 
defendant.?, It was impossible however to restrain inquisitors 
from exceeding their jurisdiction and he was obliged, August 20, 
1502, to repeat his injunctions to the same tribunal, in conse- 
quence of complaints from the Diputados. The inquisitors 
were roundly taken to task for lending themselves to the schemes 
of the receiver in buying up debts and claims and then collecting 
them through the tribunal; they were told that they must defend 
none but salaried officials actually in service; if they are plain- 
tiffs in civil suits they must apply to the court of the defendants, 
while if they are defendants the plaintiffs must seek the tribunal. 
To evoke other cases, he says, causes great scandal and will lead 
to troubles which must be prevented. A fortnight later he 
emphasized this about a civil case which they had evoked from 
the royal court; they must remit it back and not have to be 
written to again as he would not tolerate such proceedings.® 
Thus familiars and servants were not entitled to the fuero, or 
inquisitorial jurisdiction, while salaried officials enjoyed it, active 
and passive, in criminal actions and only passive in civil suits. 
Unduly favorable as was this to the Inquisition, the tribunals 
paid no attention to its limitations; they welcomed all who 


* Instrucciones de 1498, 2 2 (Arguello, fol. 12)—Archivo de Simancas, Inqui- 
sicion, Libro 939, fol. 144. 

? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 1. 

* Ibidem, Libro 13, fol. 385, 386; Lib. 2, fol. 7, 10. 

The tribunal of Murcia possessed a cédula of Ferdinand, February 28, 1505, 
ordering the payment of a debt to an official in which he used the expression that 
inquisitors are judges in all cases of officials and ministers. This seems to have 
been regarded as furnishing a foundation for the subsequent extension of juris- 
diction, for the Suprema, November 22, 1635, ordered the original to be sent to 
it and a transcript was kept by the tribunal.—MSS. of Royal Library of Copen- 
hagen, 218b, p. 204. 


Cuarp. IV] INTERFERENCE WITH COURSE OF JUSTICE 431 


sought their judgement seat, and the desire for it of those who had 
no claim on it shows that they had a reputation of selling justice. 
One or two cases will exemplify this and show how good were 
the grounds of complaint by the people. There was a certain 
Juan de Sant Feliu of Murviedro, whose father and mother-in- 
law had been condemned for heresy, and to whom Ferdinand 
had kindly granted their confiscations, including the dowry of 
his wife. In 1505 the town of Murviedro farmed out to him and 
his wife the impost on meat for 11,100 sueldos a year; he died 
and, in the settlement of his account, he was found to owe the 
town a hundred and fifty libras, which it proceeded to collect 
from his sons in the court of the governor. Under pretext that 
his property had been comascated and restored, they appealed 
in 1511 to the tribunal of Valencia, which promptly evoked the 
case and inhibited the court from further action, whereupon 
the town complained to Ferdinand who ordered the case remit- 
ted to the governor. Unabashed by this, in 1513, Sant Feliu’s 
heirs on the same pretext obtained the intervention of the tri- 
bunal in another case, in which Dofia Violante de Borja had 
sued them for 7500 sueldos which she had entrusted to him to 
invest in a censo of the town of Murviedro; the censo had been 
paid off and he had concealed the fact and kept the money. 
Judgement was given against them, when the inquisitors inter- 
posed and prohibited the royal court from further action. Fer- 
dinand expressed much indignation at their interference with 
justice in a matter wholly foreign to their jurisdiction and ordered 
the prohibition to be withdrawn. Even more arbitrary was the 
action, in 1511, of the Majorca tribunal, when Pedro Torna- 
mirandez sued the heirs of Francisco Ballester for some cattle 
and obtained judgement in the court of the royal lieutenant, 
whereupon the heirs appealed to the inquisitor who evoked the 
ease and forbade further proceedings in the secular court. None 
of the parties had any connection with the Inquisition and there 
was not even the pretext of confiscation; it was a mere wanton 
interference with the course of justice, only explicable by some 
illicit gain, and when Ferdinand’s attention was called to it he 
ordered the inquisitor to revoke his action. If, under Ferdi- 
nand’s incessant vigilance the Inquisition thus boldly prosti- 
tuted its powers, we can appreciate how well-founded, under 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 3, fol. 104, 151, 242. 


432 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


his careless successors, were the complaints of those who suffered 
under wrongs perpetrated under the pretence of serving God. 
In the Catalan Concordia of 1512 there was an attempt to do 
away with some of these abuses and the bull Pastoralis officu 
of Leo X, confirming the Concordia, marks another stage in the 
development of the fuero. No one, he said, could be cited save in 
his own ordinary court at the instance of an official or familiar; 
if it were attempted, all acts concerning it were invalid and the 
inquisitors must condemn the plaintiff in double the expenses 
and damage; if any official bought property in suit, or on which 
a suit was expected, he could be cited before a court not his own 
and if he claimed property under seizure by a secular judge, the 
latter could disregard all inhibitions issued by inquisitors; more- 
over inquisitors should have no cognizance in matters concerning 
the private property of officials. While thus striking at some 
of the more flagrant abuses of the fuero, Leo opened the door 
to worse ones by admitting familiars and the commensals or 
servants of officials to participation in the immunities of the 
Inquisition.1 The bull, in fact, is in accordance with the Instruc- 
tions of 1514, as issued by Inquisitor-general Mercader, and we 
shall see how completely the restrictive clauses were ignored 
while those admitting familiars and servants were developed.” 
The question as to familiars and servants was not absolutely 
settled for some years. It is true that, in 1515 at Logrofio, when 
the corregidor arrested Martin de Viana, a servant of the secre- 
tary Lezana, and refused to surrender him to the tribunal, he and 
his deputy and alguazil were excommunicated and the Suprema 
on appeal subjected them all to fines and humiliating penance.® 
On the other hand, in 1516 at Valladolid, when Alonso de Torres, 
servant of Inquisitor Frias, was thrown into the royal prison, the 
inquisitor did not reclaim him but procured the interposition of 
the Suprema, which ordered him to be released on bail and then, 
after nine months had passed without a charge being brought 
against him, he procured a royal cédula for the release of his 
bondsmen.* Whatever doubts may have existed on the subject 
were removed, in 1518, by a cédula of Charles V, reciting that in 


1 Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Lib. I de copias, fol. 219.—PragmAticas y 
altres Drets de Cathalunya, Lib. 1, Tit. viii, cap. 2. 

2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 933. 

3 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 925, fol. 680. 

4 Tbidem, Lib. 3, fol. 452. 


Cap. IV] IMMUNITY OF SERVANTS 433 


Jaen the secular courts assumed cognizance of criminal cases 
concerning Officials and familiars and their servants, which was 
contrary to the privileges of the Holy Office, wherefore he for- 
bade it strictly for the future.’ After this the Inquisition had no 
hesitation in insisting on its rights. When, in 1532, the corregidor 
and officials of Toledo were excommunicated for punishing the 
servant of an inquisitor and the Empress-regent Isabel wrote to 
the tribunal to absolve them, the Suprema instructed it not to 
obey her.’ She learned the lesson and, in 1535, when ordering 
some servants of inquisitors and familiars to be remitted to the 
Inquisition, she said it was accustomed to have their cases, both 
civil and criminal, and it was her pleasure that this should be 
observed.? | / 

The civil authorities were somewhat dilatory in recognizing 
the immunity of servants, and cases continued to occur in which 
the tribunals vindicated their jurisdiction energetically. About 
1565 two officers of the royal justice in Barcelona arrested a 
servant of Inquisitor Mexia in a brothel where he was quarrelling 
with a woman, for which they were thrown into the secret prison 
as though they were heretics and were banished for three months, 
while the judge of the royal criminal court, who had something 
to do with the matter, was compelled to appear in the audience- 
chamber and undergo areprimand in the presence of the assembled 
officials of the tribunal. The virtual immunity for offenders 
resulting from the privilege is illustrated by the case, in the same 
tribunal, of Pedro Juncar, servant of the receiver, who murdered 
the janitor of the Governor of Catalonia; the governor arrested 
him but was forced to surrender him to the tribunal, which 
discharged him with a sentence of exile for a year or two and 
costs.4 The influence on social order of conferring immunity on 
such a class can readily be conceived. 

The privilege of the fuero was not confined to servants but 
was extended in whatever direction the ingenuity and persever- 
ance of the tribunal could enforce it. Penitents who were ful- 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 9, fol. 1; Lib. 939, fol. 149.—MSS. of 
Bodleian Library, Arch. 8, 130. 

2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 939, fol. 147. 

3 Ibidem, fol. 144. 

* Tbidem, Visitas de Barcelona, Leg. 15, fol. 20.—A summary of cases, appar- 
ently compiled about 1582, may be found in the Simancas Archives, Leg. 1465, 
fol. 79. 

28 


434 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox Il 


filling their terms of penance were claimed and the claim was 
confirmed, in 1547, by Prince Philip. In Valencia and Barcelona 
the workmen employed on the buildings of the Inquisition were 
given nominal appointments under which they claimed immunity. 
In Lima the tribunal complained to the viceroy of the arrest of 
a bricklayer who was working for it, but it got no satisfaction. 
In Barcelona the tribunal granted inhibition with censures on the 
civil court, in which the brother of a familiar was suing a merchant 
on a protested bill of exchange.’ 


We have seen the limitations imposed by Ferdinand and the 
bull Pastoralis offictt and the reiteration of the principle that the 
plaintiff must seek justice in the court of the defendant. As far 
as regards Castile, Charles V had overthrown this in criminal 
matters for both officials and familiars. Civil cases remained 
in a somewhat undetermined state, especially concerning famil- 
iars, the inquisitors endeavoring to grasp as far as they could 
both the active and passive fuero. When, in 1551, complaints 
came from Valencia that the tribunal was collecting debts for 
familiars, Inquisitor-general Valdés wrote that he did not know 
how this had come to pass and called for precise information 
as to when it had commenced and generally as to the method 
observed in the civil cases, active and passive, of familiars, so 
that he could answer Prince Philip.? There was a good deal of 
uncertainty about the whole subject; the courts were restive 
and the situation was becoming strained. In the endeavor to 
settle it, Charles, in 1542, reissued his edict of 1518 with a sobre 
carta emphatically commanding its strict observance and for- 
bidding the secular courts from any cognizance of the criminal 
cases of officials or familiars.* This did not mend matters. The 
courts persisted in exercising jurisdiction over familiars, the 
recurso de fuerza was freely invoked and competencias multiplied. 
Both sides appealed to Charles, who was in Germany, and this 
time the opponents of the Inquisition gained the advantage. 
Prince Philip, as regent, issued a cédula, May 15, 1545, in which 


* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 7, fol. 6; Lib. 13, fol. 20, 370, 372; 
Lib. 688, fol. 18; Visitas de Barcelona, Leg. 15, fol. 20.—Archivo hist. nacional, 
Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 5, n. 1, fol. 200.—Bibl. nacional de Lima, Protocolo 
223, Expediente, 5288. 

2 Archivo de Simancas, Sala 40, Lib. 4, fol. 206 

3 Bibl. nacional, MSS., X, 157, fol. 244. 


Cuap. IV] IMMUNITY OF FAMILIARS 435 


he described how laymen, subject to the secular courts, obtained 
immunity for their crimes on pretext of being familiars; how the 
tribunals, in defending them, cast excommunications on the 
officers of justice, through which scandals and disquiet were 
daily increasing, and the course of justice was impeded. The 
familiars were in no way entitled to immunity from the secular 
courts, as they were not officials, although a different custom 
existed in Aragon and the inquisitors pretended to it in Castile, 
under the cédula of 1518 and the sobrecédula of 1542, but these 
were both irregular, not having been despatched by the Council 
and Secretariat of Castile as is customary and necessary. There- 
fore in order that delinquent familiars may not remain unpunished 
and be induced to commit crimes by the prospect of immunity, 
the emperor ordered the matter to be thoroughly discussed and 
meanwhile the cédulas of 1518 and 1542 to be suspended, in con- 
formity with which they are declared to be suspended, inquisitors 
are ordered no longer to take cognizance of the cases of familiars 
and the secular courts are instructed to prosecute them in accord- 
ance with the laws.’ 

The Inquisition did not acquiesce tamely in this defeat, which 
was aggravated by the secular courts interpreting it as giving 
them jurisdiction over officials as well as familiars. It protested 
and resisted and showed so little obedience that the Cértes of 
Valladolid, in 1548, asked that it should be compelled to confine 
itself to its proper functions in matters of faith.? Quarrels and 
recursos de fuerza continued and finally the whole question was 
referred to a junta consisting of two members each from the 
Suprema and Council of Castile. The representatives of the Inqui- 
sition conceded that it had been in fault in appointing too many 
familiars and in claiming for them all the exemptions of salaried 
officials: those of the Council admitted that the courts had erred 
in interfering with civil and criminal cases properly appertaining 
to the Holy Office. Mutual concessions were made, resulting in 


1 Bibl. nacional, MSS., X, 157, fol. 244.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, 
Lib. 939, fol. 149.—All this shows how mistaken is the assertion of Llorente 
(Hist. erft. Cap. xtvu, Art. 1) repeated by Rodrigo (III, 365) and others, that 
Charles V, in 1535, suspended the royal jurisdiction (under which the Inquisition 
had cognizance of the affairs of its officials) and restored it in 1545. This action 
was confined to the tribunal of Sicily. The anonymous author of the Discurso 
historico-legal sobre el Origen etc. de la Inquisicion, p. 93 (Valladolid, 1803) seems 
to be the only one who has recognized this. 

2 Colmeiro, Cértes de Leon y de Castilla, II, 217. 


436 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


what was known as the Concordia of Castile, March 10, 1553— 
an agreement which the Inquisition admitted, a century later, 
that neither side had observed.’ 

The Concordia was silent as to the salaried officials, thus 
leaving them in possession of the active and passive fuero in 
both civil and criminal cases. It devoted itself wholly to the 
familiars who, in this as in so much else, were the leading source 
of trouble. After regulating, as we shall see hereafter, their 
number and character, it defined that in civil cases they should 
be subject wholly to the secular courts. For the greater crimes, 
moreover, cognizance was also reserved exclusively to the courts, 
the list comprising treason, unnatural crime, sedition, violating 
royal safe-conducts, disobedience to royal mandates, treachery, 
rape, carrying off women, highway robbery, arson, house-break- 
ing and crimes of greater magnitude than these, as well as re- 
sistance or formal disrespect to the royal courts. Those who 
held office were also amenable to the courts for official mal- 
feasance. This left only petty offences subject to inquisitorial 
jurisdiction and for these familiars were liable to arrest by secular 
magistrates, subject to being immediately transferred to the 
Inquisition. For doubtful cases it was provided that, when the 
lay judge and inquisitor could not agree, there should be no con- 
tention, but the evidence was to be sent to the court of the king, 
where two members each of the Suprema and Council of Castile 
should decide as to the jurisdiction; for this a majority was re- 
quired and, in case of equal division of votes, the matter went to 
the king for final decision. No appeal from this was allowed and. 
meanwhile the accused was retained in the prison to which he had 
been consigned at arrest.’ This process of adjudicating disputes 


* Bibl. nacional, MSS., X, 157, fol. 244.—MSS. of Bodleian Library, Arch. 8, 
130.—MSS. of Library of Univ. of Halle, Ye, 17. 

? Nueva Recop., Lib. 1, Tit. i, ley 18—Novfs. Recop., Lib. 11, Tit. vii, ley 1. 

It is not without interest to observe that the privileges of officials and familiars 
of the Roman Inquisition were much more limited than in Spain. Familiars had 
no exemption from public burdens or duties.or military service and were subject 
to the secular courts in all criminal cases. When, in 1633, those of Jesi asked to 
have their civil suits tried by the Inquisition, the Congregation did not even 
answer them. The only officials entitled to the forum were those in continual 
active service, and there is nothing said about wives, children and servants shar- 
ing in the privilege. As in Spain, the number of familiars was excessive. Faenza 
was allowed 50, Ancona 40 and Rimini 30.—Decret. Sacr. Congr. Sti Officii, pp. 
197-8, 200 (R. Archivio di Stato in Roma, Fondo Camerale, Congr. del S. Offizio, 
vol. 3). 


Cuap. IV] THE LAW IN CASTILE 437 


became known as competencia, the details of which will be con- 
sidered hereafter. 

Whatever concession the Inquisition made in thus surrender- 
ing a portion of its jurisdiction over familiars was more than 
compensated by what was evidently part of the agreement, the 
issue on the same day of Philip’s cédula addressed to all judicial 
bodies forbidding them to entertain appeals of any kind from 
the acts of the Holy Office (p. 341). It thus secured complete 
autonomy; it was rendered self-judging, responsible to the king 
alone, and the populations were surrendered wholly to its dis- 
cretion. 

As far as regards Castile, the Concordia of 1553 was final. It 
is true that the royal cédula of Aranjuez, April 28, 1583, extended 
its principles to the salaried officials, but there is no trace of the 
observance of this... Another point was subjected to a temporary 
modification. The absolute denial of justice in allowing inquisi- 
tors to have their civil suits decided by their own tribunals 
attracted attention, after nearly a century, and the Suprema, 
February 18, 1641, ordered that these cases should be referred 
to it, when, if it deemed proper, it would commission the tribunal 
to hear them, but this slender restriction seems to have elicited 
so active an opposition that it was withdrawn within three 
months by a counter order of May 14th, restoring to the inquisi- 
tors the power of sitting in judgement on their own cases.’ It is 
easy to conceive the amount of oppression and wrong which they 
could thus inflict. 

With these trivial exceptions the Concordia remained the law 
in Castile. In 1568 Philip II issued a cédula stating that it had 
not been observed, wherefore he ordered strict compliance with 
it and, as late as 1775 Carlos III treats it as being still in force 
and to be respected by all parties.* If Philip, however, expected 
peace between the rival and jealous jurisdictions, as the result 
of the Concordia, he deceived himself. Both were eager for 
quarrel and opportunities to gratify combative instincts were 
not lacking. The secular courts resented the intrusion of the 


1 The only allusion that I have met to this is its citation in the argument of the 
alealdes del crimen of Granada in the case of Gerénimo Palomino. A copy is in 
the Bodleian Library, Arch. S, 130 

2 MSS. of the Royal Library of Copenhagen, 218, p. 202. 

$ Bibl. nacional, MSS., X, 157, fol. 144.—Novis. Recop., Lib. m1, Tit. viii, 
ley 10. 


438 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


Inquisition, which was careful to keep antagonism active by the 
insulting arrogance of its methods, whenever a question arose 
between them. There was ample field for contention, for not 
only were the excepted crimes loosely defined, giving rise to 
many nice questions, but the Inquisition acutely argued that 
before the royal courts could assume possession of a case the 
crime must be fully proved, for the familiar was entitled to the 
fuero until his guilt was ascertained, thus keeping in its own 
hands all the vital parts of the process and excluding the secular 
justices.’ Then the circle of excepted cases was enlarged, not only 
for familiars but for salaried officials, by various edicts from time 
to time, as we have seen with regard to pistols and discharging 
fire-arms. Another instance was a cédula of Philip I, in 1566, 
including among exceptions the violation of royal pragmaticas, 
which was put to the test, in 1594, when the Chancellery of 
Granada prosecuted a notary of the tribunal for wearing a larger 
ruff than was allowed by a sumptuary pragmatica; the tribunal 
excommunicated the judges but, when the case was carried up 
to the Suprema and Council of Castile, the Chancellery was 
justified? In the frenzied efforts to maintain the value of the 
worthless vellon coinage, Philip IV, by repeated edicts between 
1631 and 1660, deprived familiars and salaried officials of the 
fuero in cases of demanding more than the legal premium for the 
precious metals or of counterfeiting or importing base money.’ 
Frauds on the revenue from tobacco also deprived all offenders of 
exemptions, by a pragmatica of 1719, but it was difficult to enforce 
and had to be repeated in 1743, after which at last Inquisitor- 
general Prado y Cuesta, in 1747, ordered the tribunals to obey it.* 


Although Navarre was under the crown of Castile, the Con- 
cordia of 1553 was not extended to it until 1665, by a royal cédula 


1 See the case of Montalvo and del Aguila, in 1642, when the arguments mainly 
turn on this point (MSS. of Bodleian Library, Arch. 8,130). Also that of Francisco 
Cases, about 1650, when both sides were able to cite precedents in their favor.— 
Arch. hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 1, n. 1, fol. 638. 

2 MSS. of Royal Library of Copenhagen, 218b, p. 125. 

$ Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 38, fol. 264.—Nueva Recop., Lib. v, 
Tit. xxi, Declaraciones, ley 21, ¢2 9, 10.—Autos Acordados, Lib. v, Tit. xxi, 
Autos 13, 16, 21, 22, 25. 

* Autos Acordados, Lib. rx, Tit. viii, Auto 6.—Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisi- 
cion de Valencia, Leg. 10, n. 2, fol. 146.—MSS. of Royal Library of Copenhagen, 
218b, p. 265. 


Cuap. IV] VALENCIA 439 


of May 9th. The questions which agitated the rest of Spain seem 


to have rarely presented themselves there, for we hear little of 
them in that quarter, although, in 1564, the tribunal of Logrofio 
complained of the intrusion of the secular courts on its jurisdic- 
tion and there were, as we shall see hereafter, occasional collisions 
on the subject of witchcraft, which was mizti fort.’ 


The kingdoms of the Crown of Aragon were the scenes of 
much greater trouble than those of Castile, in delimiting the 
boundaries of the rival jurisdictions, for they still had institutions 
which could remonstrate against abuses and struggle for their 
removal. We have seen how recalcitrant they were when the 
Inquisition was introduced and how vigorously they struggled 
against the abuses which followed. In the Concordias of 1512 
and 1520 they secured certain paper guarantees, but these were 
brushed aside by the Inquisition with customary ill-faith. Irri- 
tation and hostility became chronic, with the result that they 
were denied some of the slender alleviations vouchsafed to 
Castile, on the ground that the character of the population and 
the neighborhood of the heretics of France rendered it necessary 
that the Holy Office should be fortified with greater privileges 
than in the rest of Spain. 

Of the three kingdoms Valencia was the one which gave the 
least trouble in this matter. Yet a case occurring in 1540 is 
highly significant of the terrorism under which the royal judges 
discharged their duties. Dr. Ferrer of Tortosa, one of the judges, 
appealed to Inquisitor-general Tavera, representing that in the 
previous year he had condemned to death a murderer, who had 
fully deserved it. Now that the inquisitor had come his enemies 
represent that the culprit was a familiar, although he had never 
claimed to be one, and it is currently reported that the inquisitor 
is about to prosecute him (Ferrer). If he is in fault in the matter 
he will cheerfully submit to punishment, but he begs not to be 
subjected to the infamy of a trial. To this appeal the Suprema 
responded by ordering the inquisitor to send it such evidence as 
he may gather and to await a reply before taking action? It 
is evident that all criminal judges lived in an atmosphere of 
dread lest at any moment the honest discharge of their functions 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 23, fol. 42.—Ibidem, Inquisicion de 
Barcelona, Cértes, Legajo 1, fol. 45. 
2 Ibidem, Sala 40, Lib. 4, fol. 107. 


440 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


might precipitate them into a disastrous conflict with the tribunal. 
It justifies the complaints of the Cortes of 1547 and 1553, the 
latter of which declared that the inquisitors exceeded their juris- 
diction, intervening in many affairs, both civil and criminal, 
that had no connection with heresy. This caused great disturb- 
ance of justice and contentions between the jurisdictions, in 
which the tribunal assumed to be supreme and to define the 
limits of its own power. Great as were these evils they were 
daily increasing and were becoming intolerable, wherefore the 
Cértes prayed that the subject be investigated and a clear defi- 
nition be made between the royal jurisdiction and that of the 
Inquisition.’ 

This resulted in a junta of the members of the Suprema and of 
the Council of Aragon, who agreed upon a Concordia, published 
by Prince Philip, May 11, 1554. In this he recited that, in con- 
sequence of the great numbers of familiars and their endeavoring 
to have all their cases, civil and criminal, tried by the tribunal, 
which sought to protect them in this against the claims of the 
royal judges, there had arisen many contentions in which the 
whole of the Audiencia had been excommunicated. To put an 
end to this unseemly strife he had caused the junta to be held, 
with the result of the following articles, which he ordered both 
sides to observe, the royal officials under pain of a thousand 
florins, and the inquisitors as they desired to please him and the 
emperor. In this the first point was the reduction of the excessive 
number of familiars; in the city of Valencia they were not to 
exceed one hundred and eighty; in towns of more than a thousand 
hearths there might be eight, in those of over five hundred six, 
in smaller places four, except that in the coast towns there might 
be two more. Lists of all appointees were to be furnished to 
the magistrates, both to check excess and to identify individuals. 
In civil suits they were to enjoy the passive fuero but not the 
active; if in contracts they renounced this privilege the condition 
held good, while, if the other party agreed to accept the juris- 
diction of the Inquisition, he could not be cited before it. In 
criminal cases, the Inquisition had sole cognizance with respect 
to officials, their servants and families and to familiars but not 
to their wives, children and servants. When contests arose with 
secular courts, mild measures were to be used and excommunica- 


* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 922, fol. 17; Inquisicion de Barcelona, 
Cortes, Leg. 17, fol. 75. 


Cuar. IV] VALENCIA 44] 


tion be avoided as far as possible. When a familiar entered into 
a treaty of peace and truce, it was to be executed before an 
inquisitor and, if it contained a condition of death for violation, 
the inquisitor, in case of such violation, was to relax the culprit 
to the secular arm to be put to death. Familiars who were in 
trade were not to enjoy the fuero for frauds or violations of 
municipal laws and officials holding public office were liable to 
the secular courts for malfeasance therein." 

This would appear to grant to the Inquisition all that it had 
any excuse for asking, but it was impossible to bind the inquisi- 
tors to any compact, or to observe any rules. A letter to them 
from the Suprema, in September, 1560, reminds them that it 
had already ordered them, in the case of Juan Sanchez, to deprive 
him of his familiarship, to withdraw their inhibitions and cen- 
sures, and to remit the affair to the secular judge, in spite of 
which they had gone forward and rendered senténce; now, as 
Sanchez is not a familiar, they must positively send the case 
back to the ordinary courts.” When such persistence in injus- 
tice existed, it is not surprising that, at the Cortes of Monzon, 
in 1564, the deputies of Valencia, like those of Aragon and 
Catalonia, presented a series of complaints, bearing chiefly on 
abuses of jurisdiction. We happen to have a view of the situation 
by an impartial observer, the Venetian envoy, Giovanni Soranzo, 
in his relation of 1565, which is worth repeating, although we 
must bear in mind that it was impossible for a Venetian statesman 
to give Philip II credit for the honest fanaticism which underlay 
his character. After alluding to the privileges of the Aragonese 
kingdoms, he proceeds “The king uses every opportunity to 
deprive them of these great privileges and, knowing that there 
is no easier or more certain method than through the Inqui- 
sition, he is continually increasing its authority. In these last 
Cortes the Aragonese prayed that the Inquisition should take 
cognizance of no cases save those of religion and said that they 
grieved greatly that it embraced infinite things as distant as 
possible from its jurisdiction and they presented many cases 
not pertaining in any way to its duties. In truth at present the 
Inquisition interposes in everything, without respect to any one of 
whatever rank or position, and we may say positively that this 
tribunal is the real master which rules and dominates all Spain. 


1 MSS. of Bodleian Library, Arch. 8, 130. 
2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Sala 40, Lib. 4, fol. 247. 


442 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox IIL 


The king replied that the Inquisition was not to be discussed in 
the Cortes, when they all arose and threatened to depart without, 
finishing any other business, if the king did not wish them to 
discuss a matter of so much importance to them. The king 
quieted them by promising that, when he returned to Castile, 
he would listen to their complaints and would not fail to grant 
the appropriate relief. But undoubtedly he did this so that the 
Cértes should end without a revolt, his intention being to increase 
rather than to diminish the importance of the Inquisition, clearly 
recognizing it as the means of maintaining his reputation and of 
keeping the people in obedience and terror.’ 

Soranzo’s account of the Cértes is not wholly complete. When 
Philip promised relief after his return to Castile, the deputies re- 
plied that they did not choose to be convoked in Castile and that 
they would go no further with the subsidio which he wanted until 
they were satisfied. The sessions were prolonged; the patience 
of the deputies outwore his own and he promised that he would 
have a visitation made of the tribunals of the three kingdoms 
and then, in concert with their Diputados, issue a new series of 
regulations.” The promise was kept. Francisco de Soto Salazar, 
a member of the Suprema, was sent, in 1566, with full powers 
and instructions to investigate all abuses, but especially those 
connected with jurisdiction in matters not of faith. In Valencia. 
his attention was particularly called to a practice of appointing 
deputy inquisitors and officials and investing them with the 
privilege of the fuero as well as mechanics employed on the 
palace of the Inquisition and houses of the officials and also to. 
the overgrown number of familiars and their character.* In Cata- 
lonia, especially, he found much to criticize, as we shall have 
occasion to see hereafter, for he performed his mission thor- 
oughly and conscientiously; he listened to all complaints, investi- 
gated them and bore back to the Suprema full reports which 
bore hardly on the methods of all the tribunals. Prolonged 
debates ensued between the Suprema, the Council of Aragon 
and the Diputados and finally, in 1568, a new Concordia was 
issued. It is significant that it no longer was a royal decree but. 
bore the shape of instructions from Inquisitor-general Espinosa, 


1 Relazioni Venete, Serie I, T. V, p. 86. 
2 Gachard, Don Carlos et Philippe II, T. I, pp. 100-2. 
3’ Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 13, fol. 370-2. 


Cuap. IV] VALENCIA 443 


and the Suprema to the tribunals, and the king only appeared 
in it as communicating it to his representatives and ordering 
its observance under .pain of a thousand florins, coupled with 
commands to favor and reverence the Inquisition and its officials, 
to give them all necessary aid and to protect and defend their 
privileges. 

The Concordia thus granted to Valencia confirmed that of 
1554 and ordered its observance, adding a number of special 
provisions, highly suggestive of the abuses which had flourished. 
As affording a view in some detail of the causes of popular irri- 
tation and of the remedies sought, I subjoin an abstract of 
the articles bearing on the subject. 


Outside of the city the local magistrates are to have cognizance of civil cases 
of familiars involving less than twelve libras. 

Familiars of other districts settling in Valencia lose the fuero, but retain it if 
the residence is temporary. 

The number of familiars is to be reduced to that provided in 1554, weeding 
out the least desirable. 

They must present themselves with their commissions to the local magistrates 
in order to be entered on the lists, without which they forfeit their exemption. 

The provision depriving those in trade of the fuero, for frauds and offences 
committed in their business, which has not been observed, is to be enforced. 

Crimes committed prior to appointment are not entitled to the fuero. 

No cleric or religious or powerful noble or baron is to be appointed. 

Consultors are not to be considered as officials, but only persons holding com- 
missions from the inquisitor-general, to whom may be added a steward of the 
prison and two advocates of prisoners. 

In future the servants of officials must really be servants living with them and 
receiving regular wages in order to be protected by the inquisitors. 

Inquisitors are not to interfere, at the petition of an official or familiar, with 
the regulations of the college of surgeons. 

Any familiar who is a carpenter and who brings lumber from the sierra of 
Cuenca shall not be protected by the inquisitors, but shall be left for judgement 
to the secular court. 

Outside of cases of heresy inquisitors must not interfere with the execution of 
justice by the royal judges under pretext that culprits have committed offences 
pertaining to them, but in such cases the judges shall be notified and allowed 
to execute justice, after which the inquisitors can inflict punishment. In case of 
heresy, however, a prisoner can be demanded, to be returned after trial, provided 
he is not sentenced to relaxation. 

Familiars are not to be protected in the violation of municipal regulations, nor, 
during pestilence, in the refusal to observe the regulations for the avoidance of 
contagion; they must submit for inspection the goods which they bring in and 


444 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


the royal judges shall not be prevented from imposing the penalties provided 
in the royal pragmatica. 

Commissioners shall not form competencias with secular or ecclesiastical 
judges, nor shall their assistants enjoy greater privileges than familiars. 

Persons temporarily employed to make arrests, or to read the edicts, or as 
procurators, etc., shall not be defended by the inquisitors. 

As the inquisitorial district of Valencia comprehends Teruel in Aragon and 
‘Tortosa in Catalonia, those places are not to be exempted from the Concordia 
under the pretext that the Concordia of 1554 spoke of the kingdom of Valencia. 

The widows of officials, while remaining unmarried, enjoy both civil and 
criminal fuero, but not their children and families as has been the case, but 
widows of familiars are deprived of it and are not to be defended by the inquisitors. 

The judge employed by the inquisitors to hear the cases of officials and familiars 
is to be dismissed; such cases are to be heard by the inquisitors outside of the 
regular hours of service and for this they are to charge no fees. 

Servants and families of salaried officials are only to have the passive fuero 
in civil cases, like familiars. 

Inquisitors are no longer to defend familiars in matters of the apportionment 
of irrigating waters, injuries to harvests, vineyards, pastures, forests, furnishing 
of lights, licences for building, street-cleaning, road-mending and furnishing pro- 
visions. 

Inquisitors are not to publish edicts with excommunication for the discovery 
of debts, thefts or other hidden offences committed against officials and familiars, 
nor such edicts against any delinquents save in cases of heresy. 

Persons arrested, except for heresy, are not to be confined in the secret prison 
but in the public one, where they can confer with their counsel and procurators, 
and they are to be allowed to hear mass and receive the sacraments. 

Familiars holding office are not to be defended for official frauds or malfeasance, 
but the secular authorities are to be freely allowed to administer justice. 

Inquisitors shall not give safe-conducts to persons outlawed or banished by 
the royal judges, except in cases of faith and then only for the time necessary 
to appear before them. 

When any official or familiar, in criminal or civil cases not of faith, has con- 
sented tacitly or explicitly to the secular jurisdiction or has pleaded clergy, the 
inquisitors shall not protect him nor inhibit the secular judges. And if any 
official or familiar inherits property in litigation the case shall remain in the 
court where it is pending. 

As familiars in civil cases have only the passive and not the active fuero there 
shall no longer, as heretofore, be artifices employed, such as pretended criminal 
prosecutions and interdicts, to obtain cognizance of such cases, but they shall 
be conducted in the court of the defendant. 

When a suit between outsiders has been decided, if any official or familiar 
intervenes to prevent the execution of the decision, on the pretext that he is in 
possession of the propertv at issue or a part of it, the inquisitors shall not support 
him in it. 


Cuar. IV] VALENCIA 445 


If an outsider commits a crime while in company with an official or familiar, 
or is an accomplice in a crime committed by an official or familiar, the inquisitors 
shall not have cognizance of his case but only of that of the official or familiar. 

When a grave crime has been committed by or against a familiar the inquisitors 
shall not send a judge to take testimony or punish, with salary by the day, but 
shall avoid expense by making a commissioner gather the evidence. 

Inquisitors shall no longer enforce contracts of peace and truce unless they 
have been entered into before them or by their order. 

Inquisitors shall not have cognizance of contracts between outsiders because of 
a clause submitting them to the fuero, nor of cases of donations or cession to 
officials or familiars. 

Inquisitors shall not protect widows pf officials and familiars in refusing to pay 
imposts and contributions. 

When inquisitors have to summon secular judges before them it must be only 
in cases where it is unavoidable and then only with great consideration. 

If a bankrupt is a familiar the inquisitors have cognizance, but not in the case 
of an outsider under pretext that an official or familiar is a creditor. 

Familiars shall not make arrests or other execution of justice without orders 
from inquisitors. 

Inquisitors shall not proceed against the priors and officials of guilds and 
confraternities who levy upon a familiar, who is a member, for dues under the 
rules of the association, or when a familiar has had the administration of a church 
or hermitage or hospital and is sued for debts or contributions due.! 


The other prayers and demands of the Cortes were rejected, 
but those which were granted sufficiently indicate the abusive 
manner in which the tribunal had extended its jurisdiction, 
how that jurisdiction was admittedly used to protect officials 
and familiars in violations of law, and how intolerable was the 
influence on municipal and commercial life of letting loose on the 
community a class who were beyond the reach of justice. We 
can readily understand the eagerness of the lawless and unscrupu- 
lous to obtain positions which secured for them such privileges 
and why it was impossible to restrain inquisitors within the pre- 
scribed limits of their appointing power. 

After protracted effort the Valencians had thus cbtained 
promise of substantial relief, but as usual it was a promise only 
made to be broken. How little intention there was of enforcing 
the reform was promptly revealed for, when the authorities 
naturally ordered the new Concordia to be printed so that the 
courts and rural magistrates could be guided by it in their deal- 
ings with the officials and familiars, the inquisitors at once 


1 MSS. of Bodleian Library, Arch. S, 130. 


446 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boor IL 


ordered the printers to suspend work and appealed to the king, 
who commanded that all copies should be surrendered.’ Although 
the settlement was permanent and remained in force until the 
end, it apparently never was published for general information. 
At the moment it was regarded as greatly limiting the secular 
jurisdiction of the tribunal, and the worthy Valencian inquisitor, 
Juan de Rojas, says that he is ashamed to allude to its depressed. 
and weakened condition, which has worked great injury to the 
faith. His grief was superfluous; the tribunal was not accus- 
tomed to be bound by law and its methods of enforcing its 
assumed prerogatives were difficult to resist. In 1585 the Cértes 
had a fresh accumulation of grievances which, by order of the 
king, the Suprema sent to the inquisitors with orders to report the 
method of meeting them most advantageous to the Holy Office.* 

If space permitted abundant cases could be cited to show the 
justice of these complaints. In fact, the correspondence between 
the Suprema and the tribunal, during the last fifteen years of the 
sixteenth century, is largely devoted to cases of competencias 
arising from crimes of all descriptions committed by familiars and 
to the punishments inflicted by the tribunal, the heaviest of 
which is the galleys, in two or three cases. Sometimes the charges 
are dismissed and as a whole the criminals seem to have escaped 
so lightly that prosecution only served to encourage their law- 
lessness.4 There was no improvement as time went on and a 
case occurring in 1632 is worth alluding to as illustrating the 
results of the fwero and the spirit in which it was administered 
by the tribunal. Don Martin Santis was murdered by pistol 
shots, while returning with some Dominican frailes in a coach 
from the Grao of Valencia to the city. Four notorious familiars, 
Pedro Rebert, Joan Ciurana, Jaime Blau and Calixto Tafalla, were 
suspected and were arrested by the Audiencia. The tribunal 
claimed them, a competencia was formed and the case came up 
before the Suprema and the Council of Aragon. The Marquis of 
los Velez, the viceroy, took advantage of it to represent to Philip 
IV the disorders and scandals caused by the criminal familiars 
who were protected by the Inquisition. This paper was referred 
to the Council of Aragon which, on July 21st, presented a consulta 
on the subject. There is, it says, no peace or safety to be hoped 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 688, fol. 59. 

? Rojas de Hereticis, P. 1, n. 446. 

3 Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Cartas del Consejo, Leg. 5, n. 
110 50: 4 Tbidem. 


Cuap. IV] VALENCIA 447 


for in Valencia unless there is reform in the selection of familiars, 
for there is no crime committed there in which they are not prin- 
cipals or accomplices, in the confidence of escape through the 
intervention of the tribunal, since there is no one, however guilty 
he may be of atrocious crime, who is not speedily seen walking 
the streets in freedom. In all disturbances, familiars are recog- 
nized as ringleaders and their object in gaining appointment is 
only to enjoy immunity for their crimes. In Valencia, Pedro 
Revert, Joan Ciurana and Sebastian Adell, all familiars, are the 
chief disturbers of the peace. Soin Villareal, a place notorious for 
murders, Jaime Blau has been the moving spirit. In Benignamin, 
where there are constant outbreaks, the leaders of the factions 
are Gracian Espafia, Martin Barcela and others, likewise famil- 
iars. It is the same in Orihuela with Juan Garcia de Espejo and 
others. Scarce anywhere is there trouble in which familiars are 
not concerned and they daily become more insolent through 
impunity, for the inquisitors never punish with the requisite 
severity. One result is that it is almost impossible to procure 
evidence against these malefactors, in consequence of witnesses 
knowing that they will shortly be released and will avenge them- 
selves. Justice cannot be administered and still greater evils 
_ are to be anticipated if the king does not provide a remedy. If 
it is difficult to revise the Concordia and introduce the necessary 
provisions, at least the king can order that these familiars be 
dismissed and greater care be exercised in new appointments. 
All the viceroys have recognized these impediments to justice, 
for these people only seek exemption from the secular courts in 
order to be free to commit crimes. 

We might imagine much of this to be exaggeration were not 
its truth tacitly admitted by the Suprema, when transmitting it 
to Valencia with instructions for information on which to base 
a reply. There is no rebuke or exhortation to amendment, 
but the inquisitors are told to act with the utmost caution and 
secrecy; to report the number of familiars in Valencia and how 
many are unmarried; to give details as to the cases cited by the 
Council of Aragon and what punishments were inflicted; what 
was the record of those inculpated in the murder of Don Martin 
Santis; covertly to obtain statistics of crime in Valencia for the 
last ten years, committed by those not exempt, the punishments 
inflicted by the royal court and whether these were subsequently 
remitted; whether, when familiars were tried by the tribunal, 


448 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


accomplices were prosecuted in the royal courts, and if so what 
sentences were pronounced; also to make secret investigation as 
to promises made to familiars by the Judges to let them off easily 
if they would not claim the fuero, and finally to furnish a list of 
cases in which the tribunal has punished its officials for trifling 
offences. Altogether the effort was evidently much less to offer 
a justification than to make a tu quoque rejoinder. Apparently 
the statistics asked of the tribunal were unsatisfactory, for there 
was no use made of them in the answer presented October 6th, in 
which, after seeking to explain away the assertions of the viceroy 
and Council of Aragon, the Suprema accused the secular courts 
and their officials of perpetual prosecution of familiars, who were 
arrested on the slightest suspicion, assumed to be guilty and 
then forced by cruel treatment to renounce the fuero. The 
suggestions for reform were airily brushed aside. To dismiss 
delinquent familiars would be almost impossible, in view of its 
effect upon their families and kindred. To enquire of the royal 
officials as to the character of aspirants for appointment was 
inadmissible, as it would admit them to participation in a matter 
with which they had nothing to do. The true cure for the 
troubles would be to secure the Inquisition in its rights by for- 
bidding the secular courts from assuming any jurisdiction over 
familiars. In short it was a passionate outburst, precluding all 
hope of amendment, to which the king replied by telling the 
Suprema to see that the tribunal did not employ violent measures 
against the royal officials, but report to him any excess for his 
action. Evidently nothing was to be hoped for from him and 
indeed he had written on August 6th to the viceroy that the case 
must take its regular course as a competencia and the inquisi- 
tors must not use inhibitory censures or summon the judges to 
appear before them. The result was the usual one that the tri- 
bunal obtained cognizance of the case; one, at least, of the 
accused, Jaime Blau, was found guilty, for we have his insuffi- 
cient sentence, condemning him to exile and a fine of three 
hundred ducats—a sentence which goes far to explain the eager- 
ness of the inquisitors to extend their jurisdiction, for they rarely 
inflicted corporal punishments on their delinquent officials, when 
pecuniary ones were so much more profitable.’ 


? Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 1, n. 1, fol. 766; Leg. 8, n. 
2, fol. 171, 172, 200, 219, 277, 322, 440, 442.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, 
Lib. 20, fol. 184-42. 


Cuap. IV] VALENCIA 449 


The same spirit was shown when, in 1649, disturbances between 
armed bands led Philip IV to order the Suprema to instruct the 
inquisitors that familiars and officials participating in these 
brawls, or lending aid to peacebreakers, should not enjoy the 
fuero and that the tribunal should not defend them or interfere 
with the course of justice. Instead of obeying, the Suprema 
replied that it suspended the order until the king should be better 
informed. It then proceeded with a long argument to show that 
the faith would be imperilled by such abridgement of the privi- 
leges of the Holy Office. Besides, these factional contests had 
always been customary in Valencia é¢nd it was impossible to 
avoid favoring one side or the other, for these armed bands 
demanded whatever they wanted—money, or food or clothes— 
and people were forced to give it at the risk of having their har- 
vests burnt or their throats cut. The consulta ended with the 
impudent suggestion that in future it would be much better for 
the king, before issuing such decrees, to communicate to the 
Suprema the consultas of the other councils on which they were 
based so that a junta could be formed and the matter be debated.’ 

Evidently the Suprema held that this semi-savage state of 
society should be encouraged by favoring the factionists and, 
under such conditions, amelioration was impossible. Rivalry of 
jurisdiction paralyzed the law and there was perpetual friction 
over the veriest trifles, for the tribunal was always on the watch 
to resist the minutest infraction of its prerogatives or disregard of 
its dignity. When, in 1702, Jacinto Nadal, a familiar of Onten- 
iente, received a summons to appear before Don Pedro Dom- 
enech, a criminal judge of the Audiencia, he at once appealed to. 
the tribunal which sent word, on May 29th, that he had been 
under arrest since March 25th and the papers in any charge 
against him must be surrendered to it. It turned out that 
Domenech only wanted him to enter security for his son and,. 
when this was done, the inquisitors complained that Nadal had. 
done wrong in going to the judge after appealing to them, and. 
that Domenech had not treated them with proper respect, so: 
that some months were required to arrange a truce between them.’ 


Aragon was a source of greater trouble than Valencia. The 
popular spirit was more independent, it had resisted the intro-- 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 38, fol. 14. 
2 Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 1, n. 3, fol. 26. 
29 


450 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boor Il 


duction of the Inquisition until the murder of San Pedro Arbués 
had rendered further opposition impossible, it had been cheated 
of the fruits of the tenacity of Juan Prat and it possessed an 
institution peculiar to itself, designed to limit the encroachments 
of the sovereign power and well adapted to restrain the arrogance 
of anything less formidable than the mingled spiritual and tem- 
poral jurisdiction of the Holy Office. 

The origin of the court of the Justicia of Aragon was fondly 
attributed by the Aragonese to the legendary times of the king- 
dom of Sobrarve and there is fair probability in the theory of 
the latest writer on the subject that it was derived by the Chris- 
tians from the conquered Moors.’ In the thirteenth century the 
Justicia was already judge between the king and his subjects; 
every precaution was taken to render him independent; he was 
irremovable by the king and even his resignation was void; he 
could accept no office from the king; he was not liable to arrest 
and in a case of prosecution the Cértes sat in judgement on him; 
every person in the kingdom was required to obey his commands, 
to respect his decisions and to aid in their enforcement. His 
court consisted of his assessors or heutenants, originally appointed 
by him, but subsequently by the king. ‘The Cértes of 1528 
increased the number to five, submitting fifteen names to Charles 
V, who selected five, while the rest were placed in a bolsa and 
drawn as vacancies occurred. They were virtually the equals 
of the Justicia, for the assent of a majority was required in all 
judgements and all precautions were taken to secure their inde- 
pendence.” It is true that, in spite of the inviolability of the 
Justicia, there were cases on record in which Justicias had been 
made way with and that, on the suppression of the rising caused 
by Antonio Pérez, in 1591, the Justicia, Juan de Lanuza, was 
beheaded without trial, and in the ensuing Cértes of Tarazona 
the appointment of both Justicia and lieutenants was surren- 
dered to the king.* Nevertheless the court of the Justicia was 
regarded by the Aragonese with the greatest pride and reverence, 
as the safeguard of their liberties and the highest expression of 


* Blancas, Aragonensium Rerum Commentarii, p. 26 (Cesarauguste, 1598). 
—Julian Ribera, Origines del Justicia de Aragon (Zaragoza, 1897). 

* Fueros y Observancias del Reyno de Aragon, Lib. 1, fol. 21-3; Lib. mz, fol. 
69-84 (Zaragoza, 1624).—Actos de Cortes del Reyno de Aragon, fol. 1 (Zaragoza, 
1664).—Blancas, op. cit., p. 361. 

* Ribera, op. cit., p. 182.—Blaneas, op. cit., p. 499.—Argensola, Informacion de 
los Sucesos del Reino de Aragon, cap. xlv, lv (Madrid, 1808). 


Cuap. IV] ARAGON 451 


judicial authority existing in the world; it was the bond that 
united the state and the foundation of its tranquillity. When 
the Justicia authorized the cry of Contrajuero! Viva la Libertad 
y ayuda 4 la Libertad! it summoned every citizen to sally forth 
in arms to defend the liberties of the land. Moreover, he had the 
power of withholding from execution all papal decrees, and his 
authority in ecclesiastical matters in general caused him to be 
popularly termed the married pope.* 

So far as we are concerned, the power of the court was exercised 
through two processes, the manifestacion and the firma. The 
former was a kind of habeas corpus,/ under which a person had 
to be produced before it, either to be liberated on bail or to be 
confined in the carcel de mantfestados—a special prison over which 
even the king had no jurisdiction. The summons of a mani- 
festacion had to be obeyed, even if the subject were on the gallows 
with the halter around his neck, or if it was addressed to the 
highest secular or spiritual court of the land. It was a privilege 
to which every citizen was entitled; when, in 1532, Charles V 
sent orders that Don Pedro de Luna should be deprived of it, 
he was not obeyed, and a special envoy was sent to him in Ger- 
many, asking the prompt withdrawal of the command as, until 


. the return of the messenger, the land would be in great suspense. 


‘The firma was of various kinds, but in general it was of the nature 
of an injunction, stopping all proceedings and summoning the 
parties before the court of the Justicia, where their cases would 
be determined, and it was especially useful in preventing arbi- 
trary arrests and seizure of property. Failure to obey a firma 
was promptly followed by seizure of temporalities and, under a 


-fuero of King Martin, it could be served on the king himself. 


One was served on Charles V, at Valladolid, and again one on the 
papal nuncio and, when the latter disregarded it, his temporalities 
were sequestrated. Such a jurisdiction could not fail to come 
into collision with the Inquisition, against which its powers were 
frequently invoked, and the favorite device of the tribunal, of 
evading service by closing its doors, was unavailing, for attach- 
ing the firma to the gates was held to be legal service. In 1561, 
the Justicia granted a manifestacion to Don Juan Francés del 
Arifio, in a case not of faith; the tribunal prepared to answer by 
fulminating excommunications, but the court issued a monitorio 


1 Blasco de Lanuza, Historias de Aragon, II, 143 (Zaragoza, 1622).—Blancas, 
op.cit., Epist. prelim., p. 2—Macanaz, Regalias de los Reyes de Aragon, pp. 85, 91. 


452 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


against it, when a settlement was reached which both parties 
considered satisfactory. In the same year, when the inquisitors 
arrested Bartolomé Garate, secretary of the court, it served a 
monitorio upon them and, in 1568, it did the same for the cen- 
sures issued against Augustin de Morlanes, of the criminal council 
of the Audiencia. In 1626, when Pedro Banet, secretary of the 
tribunal, was accused of the murder of Juan Domingo Serveto, 
the action of the inquisitors led to the issue against them of a 
firma and monitorio, under which their temporalities were seized 
and this was followed by another firma, prohibiting the use of 
excommunication.” 

Under such institutions, animated by such a spirit, it was 
inevitable that the extension of the temporal jurisdiction of the 
Holy Office should provoke a bitter and prolonged conflict. We 
have seen the early struggles of this; how concessions were wrung 
from monarch and Inquisition, to be disregarded by them as soon 
as the momentary pressure had passed, and how the remon- 
strances of the Cortes of 1528 and 1533 were contemptuously 
brushed aside. The grievances were real and the Suprema knew 
them to be such, but the policy was invariable of denying their 
existence and refusing amendment when asked for by the suf- 
ferers. The temper in which complaints were heard was signifi- 
cantly manifested when, in 1533, the Cortes of Monzon adopted. 
certain articles and presented them to Inquisitor-general Man- 
rique and the Suprema, with the request that they should be: 
adopted. Thereupon Miguel de Galbe, fiscal of the tribunal of 
Lérida, addressed to Manrique a formal accusation, naming four 
members of the Cortes, who seem to have been the committee: 
deputed to communicate with the Suprema, asking that they 
and all who had advocated the articles should be prosecuted as. 
fautors of heretics and impeders and disturbers of the Inquisition, 
while the articles in question should be publicly torn and burnt. 
as condemned and suspect of heresy, injurious to the honor of 
God and prejudicial to the Holy Office.? Parliamentary discus-- 
sion had doubtless been warm and freedom of debate and legis-. 
lation was contrary to the principles of the Holy Office. Possibly 
it was the unpleasant experience of the Suprema on this occasion 


1 Fueros y Observancias del Reyno de Aragon, Lib. 1, fol. 23.—Dormer,, 
Afiales de Aragon, Lib. 11, cap. lx.—Blancas, op. cit., pp. 350-1.—Archivo de la 
Corona de Aragon, Leg. 528, n. 4—Archivo de Simancas, Sala 40, Lib. 4, fol. 262. 
—Bibl. nacional, MSS., Mm, fol. 122. * MS. penes me. 


Cuap. IV] ARAGON 453 


that led it to keep away from the Cortes of Monzon in 1537 and 
to order the inquisitors to do likewise or, if their duties called them 
there, to keep silent. Thus, when the Cortes asked the emperor 
to make the Inquisition obey the laws, he was able to promise 
accordingly and then the Suprema could subsequently argue it 
away in a consulta.’ 

The remedial decree of Prince Philip, in 1545, was limited to 
Castile, and Aragon was coolly told that its customs were different. 
Abuses continued unchecked and at the Cértes of Monzon, in 
1547, a long series of grievances was presented to the inquisitor- 
general, as though the crown had ceased to be a factor. The bull 
Pastoralis offic, by which Leo X had confirmed the Concordia 
of 1512, had limited the number of familiars to ten perma- 
nent ones in Saragossa and ten temporary ones elsewhere as 
needed, in place of which the number was between five hundred 
and a thousand; the bull had prescribed that they should be 
married men of good character, in place of which many were 
bandits and homicides and of notoriously evil life; the bull had 
ordered dismissal for officials and familiars who did not pay their 
debts or who engaged in trade, whereas the fuero was held to 
cover debts contracted and offences committed prior to appoint- 
ment; when they became bankrupt they took refuge with the 
tribunal and the creditors were unpaid; if they were creditors of 
a bankrupt they seized all the assets and others got nothing; 
men procured appointments in order to revenge themselves in 
safety on their enemies; it was impossible to collect debts of them 
and this protection was extended even to women. A woman who 
claimed that her father had been a familiar was thus defended 
from her creditors; the brother of a notary of the tribunal, who 
had committed an offence, caused the aggrieved parties to be 
arrested and the inquisitors held them until they were forced to 
a@ compromise. How little hope there was of redress for all this 
is visible in the contemptuous indifference with which Inquisitor- 
general Valdés answered the several articles. As to bandits and 
homicides being made familiars, he said the Inquisition had need 
of all kinds of officials for its various functions, and as to the spe- 
cific complaints the stereotyped answer was that any one deem- 
ing himself aggrieved could appeal to the Suprema and get justice.” 

1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 78, fol. 145, 192. 


? Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Lib. I de copias, fol. 219 yee ret de 
Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 922, fol. 12. 


454 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


The Concordia of 1553 was applicable to Castile alone and that 
of 1554 to Valencia. Aragon remained without the slender alle- 
viation provided for in the latter, for the adjustments of 1512 and 
1521 were treated as non-existent. At the Cdrtes of 1563-4 the 
complaints were so vivacious that, as we have seen, Philip prom- 
ised investigation which resulted in the Concordia of 1568. The 
formula for Aragon was virtually the same as the combined 
Valencia Concordias of 1554 and 1568, the evils with which the 
two kingdoms were afflicted being virtually the same. As 
usual, familiars were the class that excited the bitterest hostility. 
Their commissions were all to be called in and then sixty were to 
be appointed for Saragossa, while the other towns were assigned 
from eight to one or two according to population. Their char- 
acter was to be closely scrutinized and all bandits, homicides, 
criminals, powerful nobles, frailes and clerics were to be excluded, 
and no one was to enjoy the fuero whose name was not on lists 
presented to the magistrates. They were to have, in criminal 
matters, the active and passive fuero but in civil suits only the 
passive; it was the same with servants of officials, while officials 
themselves had active and passive in both civil and criminal. 
The utmost caution and moderation was prescribed in the employ- 
ment of inhibitions and excommunications of the royal judges, 
and the royal alguazils were not to be arrested save in cases of 
grave and notorious infraction of inquisitorial rights." 

The Concordia did not bring concord. In 1571 there arose a 
bitter dispute between the tribunal and the court of the Justicia, 
in which excommunications were freely used and, in December, 
the Diputados appealed to Pius V to evoke the case and remove 
the censures, but he told them to go to the inquisitor-general. 
After the death of Pius, the kingdom insisted with Gregory XIII 
and, in December, 1572, obtained from him a brief committing 
the case to the Suprema or to Ponce de Leon the new inquisitor- 
general, but, at the same time, he ordered that some remedy be 
found to prevent the inquisitors from abusing the privileges 
conceded to them by the canons and the popes.? The next year, 
1573, formal complaints were made by the kingdom of infrac- 
tions of the Concordia and, by 1585, aggravation had reached a 
point that the Cortes asked for a new concordia. Philip promised 
to send a person to Saragossa to gather information as to griev- 


* Actos de Corte del Reyno de Aragon, fol. 94-6 (Zaragoza, 1664). 
? Bibl. nacional, MSS., D, 118, fol. 108, n. 38; Dd, 145, fol. 352. 


Cuar. IV] ARAGON 455 


ances alleged against certain inquisitors and officials, after which 
arrangements were made for the drafting and acceptance or 
rejection of a new agreement, but there is no trace of any 
resultant understanding.’ Quarrelling necessarily continued with 
little intermission. In 1613 the removal of the name of Juan 
Porquet, a familiar, from wnsaculacion, by the royal commissioner 
of Tamarit, gave rise to a great disturbance which was long 
remembered and, in 1619, there was a clash between the tribunal 
and the captain-general, which caused much scandal, resulting 
in the governor being summoned to Madrid, where he was kept. 
for four years.’ ff 

Thus it went on until, in 1626, the Cértes were again assembled. 
It was known that demands for relief would be made and the 
Suprema asked Philip to submit to it whatever articles were pro- 
posed, in reply to which he assured it that there should be no 
change to its prejudice, but that he,would procure its increase of 
privilege.* The chief business of the Cértes was the questions 
connected with the Inquisition. Philip was not present and his. 
representative, the Count of Monterrey, did not feel empowered 
to grant the demands made. The only absolute action taken 
was to adopt as a fuero or law the Concordia of 1568, which 
hitherto had only the authority of the orders of the king and 
inquisitor-general. As regards reform, it was left to a commis- 
sion, consisting on one side of royal appointees and on the other 
of four delegates named by each of the four brazos or estates. 
The commission framed a series of fourteen articles, by no means 
radical in their character, but Philip procrastinated in confirming 
or rejecting them; the Suprema, in 1627, appealed to Rome to 
withhold papal sanction and they were quietly allowed to drop, 
on the pretext that the Concordia of 1568, now erected into law, 
would suffice to prevent future grounds of complaint. How 
futile this was is apparent from a conflict which occurred during 
the sitting of the commission. The assessor of the governor, as 
was his duty, entered the house of the secretary of the tribunal, 
flagrante delicto, for a most treacherous murder attributed to him. 
Although his obligation to do this was notorious, arrest of sub- 
ordinates followed on both sides and the indignant people were 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 82, fol. 84.—Fueros de Aragon, fol. 
222 (Zaragoza, 1624). Cf. Dormer, Afiales de Aragon, Lib. 11, cap. xxxviii. 

2 Bibl. nacional, MSS., Mm, 464. 

8 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 30, fol. 474. 


456 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


with difficulty restrained from a tumult. The royal officials at 
once took steps to form a competencia, in conformity with the 
Concordia which had just been erected into a law; this required all 
proceedings to be suspended but the inquisitors excommunicated 
the assessor, refusing to join in the competencia because, as they 
asserted, the case was an evident one, thus assuming that they 
could set aside all law by merely declaring that a case was evident.’ 

The Inquisition had never been restrained by the Concordia 
and now that it had again baffled the Cortes it was still less 
inclined to submit to restraint. Quarrels continued as virulent 
as before, a single example of which will illustrate its invincible 
tendency to extend its jurisdiction on all possible pretexts. 
Berenguer de San Vicente of Huesca, in 1534, had founded in 
that city the College of Santiago and when, in 1538, the munici- 
pality added an endowment of more than six thousand ducats, 
he made the magistrates its patrons. In 1542 he procured from 
Charles V a cédula, confirmed by the pope, making the inquisitors 
of Aragon visitors or inspectors of the college, during the royal 
pleasure and so long as they should perform their functions 
loyally and well. This supervisory function they stretched in 
course of time to bring the college and all its members under their 
jurisdiction, although in 1643 it was asserted that the last visita- 
tion had been made in 1624. This power they exercised in most 
arbitrary fashion. When an attempt was made to burn the col- 
lege and the town offered a reward for the detection of the incen- 
diary, they interposed with the threat of an interdict and fright- 
ened the citizens into submission. In 1643 a pasquinade against 
some of the inhabitants led to the prosecution of the rector of the 
college, Dr. Juan Lorenzo Salas, who promptly procured letters 
from the tribunal inhibiting further proceedings and demanding 
all the papers. The patience of Huesca was exhausted. It 
declared its position to be intolerable, for the students appealed 
to the fuero in all disputes with the townsmen, and the result of 
the stimulus thus given to that turbulent element was driving 
away the population and every one lived in apprehension of some 
terrible event. To gain relief it applied to the Audiencia for a 
competencia but was told that this was impossible, whereupon 
it obtained from the court of the Justicia a firma prohibiting the 


* Fueros y Actos de los Cértes de Barbastro y de Calatayud, pp. 20-22, 55-6 
(Zaragoza, 1626).—Archivo de la Corona de Aragon, Leg. 528.—Archivo de 
Simancas, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Leg. 1, fol. 12. 


Cap. IV] ARAGON 457 


inquisitors from acting; they refused to allow it to be served 
when it was put on the gate of the Aljaferia with notice that if 
answer was not made within thirty days it would be followed 
with exile and seizure of temporalities. The Suprema ordered the 
inquisitors to answer by excommunicating all concerned. Philip 
was then in Saragossa, on his way to Catalonia. to put himself at 
the head of his army, for the disgrace of Olivares had forced him 
to govern as well as to reign, but he was compelled to distract his 
thoughts with these miserable squabbles. The Council of Aragon 
appealed to him to require the inquisitors to show cause why 
they should not be deprived of the visitation and to impose silence 
on all until he should reach a decision; the Audiencia rendered 
an opinion that the court of the Justicia could not refuse to issue 
the firma and, if the complainant insisted on its service, it must 
be served if the whole power of the kingdom had to be called 
upon. On the other hand the Suprema declared that the service 
of the firma was unexampled and urged the king to support the 
Inquisition in a matter on which depended the ruin or the pres- 
ervation of the monarchy, for it would be better to close the 
Holy Office than to expose its jurisdiction to such disgrace, 
while in these calamitous times favor shown to the Inquisition 
would placate God and insure the success of his arms. Philip’s 
reply was long and maundering, irresolute between his reverence ~ 
for the Inquisition and his fear of alienating in his extremity the 
Aragonese by violating their most cherished privileges. If Huesca 
would desist from the service of the firma he would order the 
tribunal to form a competencia. Huesca, however, was intract- 
able; its very existence, it asserted, was at stake and it begged 
the king not to interfere with the legal remedies to which it had 
been forced and, in conveying this reply to the king, the Council 
of Aragon warned him that it could not prevent Huesca from 
serving the firma, as this would be a notorious violation of the 
law on the point regarded by the kingdom as most essential. 
‘Yet, after all, the question was evaded by the device of appointing 
as visitor of the college the inquisitor Juan Llano de Valdés, who 
succeeded in reaching an agreement with the city. It would 
seem that thereafter special visitors were nominated for, in 1665, 
we hear of such an appointment issued to Inquisitor Carlos del 
Hoya and it may be doubted whether Huesca gained much." 


1 Archivo de la Corona de Aragon, Leg. 528, n. 4—Archivo de Simancas, 
Inquisicion, Sala 40, Lib. 4, fol. 127; Lib. 38, fol. 205, 209, 262, 280, 290. 


458 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boor II 


These disturbances mark the highest point reached by the 
Inquisition in Aragon as regards its temporal jurisdiction. How 
little cause of complaint it really had, and how Aragon, in spite 
of its sturdy independence, had endured greater abuses than 
those permitted in Castile, is evinced in a suggestion made by 
the Suprema, February 11, 1648, in response to a demand from 
the king to devise some new source of raising money for the bank- 
rupt treasury. This was that if he would grant to the familiars 
of Castile the same privileges of active and passive fuero enjoyed 
by those of Aragon, they would cheerfully contribute to a con- 
siderable assessment, with the added advantage of diminishing 
the competencias which caused so much trouble and loss of time.’ 
Such a proposal affords the measure of the wrongs inflicted on 
society by those who profited by their exemption from the 
secular courts, for even the more limited privileges of the Cas- 
tilian familiars rendered the position one to be eagerly sought, 
in spite of the considerable cost of proving the condition precedent 
of limpieza, or purity of blood. These evils were vastly aggravated 
by the fact, as we shall see hereafter, that the tribunals never re- 
garded the limitation on numbers prescribed by the Concordias, 
but filled the land with these privileged persons who, for the most 
part, turned to the best account the protection of the Holy Office. 

That Aragon should be permanently restive under this adverse 
discrimination was inevitable and the time had come when it 
could dictate in place of supplicating. Since the Cértes of 1626 
twenty years elapsed before Philip found himself constrained to 
assemble them again. The situation was desperate; the Catalan 
rebellion bade fair to end in the permanent alienation of the 
Principality to France, and it was not wise to impose too severe 
a strain on the loyalty of Aragon, when the Cértes met Septem- 
ber 20, 1645, for a session of fifteen months. In preparation for 
the struggle, the Suprema presented to the king, September 30th, 
an elaborately argued memorial in which it told him that the 
calamities of the war should lead him to greater zeal in fortifying 
the Inquisition with new graces and privileges, so as to win the 
favor of God, whose cause they served and from whom alone was 
relief to be expected. It was therefore asked that whatever 
demands on the subject should be presented should be reserved 
for discussion with the inquisitor-general and Suprema.” Philip 


* Archivo de Simancas, Inq., Gracia y Justicia, Leg. 621, fol. 90. 
? Archivo gén. de la C. de Aragon, Leg. 528. 


Cuap. IV] ARAGON 459 


doubtless made the desired promise, but the Aragonese had too 
often found their hopes frustrated in this manner to submit to 
it again under existing circumstances. 

The Cortes lost no time in presenting their petition on the sub- 
ject, which asked for radical reform in all the Aragonese kingdoms. 
The jurisdiction of the Inquisition was to be confined to cases of 
faith and to civil and criminal actions between its officials. In 
certain mixed cases, such as bigamy, unnatural crime, sorcery, 
solicitation and censorship it should have jurisdiction cumula- 
tive with the appropriate secular and spiritual courts. A number 
of minor points were added, including « demand that all inquis- 
itors and officials should be natives and it was significantly stated 
that the petition was presented thus early in order that it might 
be granted, so that the Cortes could proceed more heartily with 
the servicio that was asked for. This paper was submitted to 
the Suprema which replied in a long consulta, March 31, 1646, 
arguing that the Inquisition had been introduced into Aragon 
without law and was independent of all law. It proceeded to 
demonstrate, as we have seen (p. 345), that its temporal 
jurisdiction was inalienable and that the Concordias were com- 
pacts which could not be modified without its consent. The 
officials were so abhorred that it would be impossible for them 
to perform their duties if they were not thus protected. If the 
Cértes should stubbornly insist, the king was urged, like Charles. 
V in 1518, to remember his soul and his conscience, and to prefer 
the loss of part of his dominions rather than consent to anything 
contrary to the honor of God and the authority of the Inquisition.’ 

The policy of the Suprema was to carry the war into Africa, 
and it followed this manifesto with another demanding that the 
court of the Justicia should be prohibited from issuing firmas and 
manifestaciones in cases concerning the Inquisition. Both sides 
asked for more than they expected to get and, when the Cortes. 
answered these papers, June 20th, after numerous citations to 
disprove the arguments of the Suprema and an exposition of the 
hardships caused by the existing system, they opened the way to 
a compromise by pointing out that Castile for nearly a hundred 
years had enjoyed what Aragon had vainly prayed for, and con- 
cluded by suggesting that the best settlement would be to confer 
on Aragon the Concordia of Castile which had been thoroughly 


1 Archivo gén. de la C. de Aragon, Leg. 528. 


460 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


discussed by lawyers and its practical working determined and 
understood.* 

Finally the demands of the Cértes were formulated in a series 
of twenty-seven articles, which were prudently declared to be 
law, whether confirmed or not by the inquisitor-general. Of these 
the essential ones deprived familiars of the active and passive 
fuero in civil suits, of the active in criminal cases, and excepted 
certain specified crimes in the passive. Servants of salaried 
officials were put on the same footing in criminal matters. The 
number of both familiars and salaried officials was limited to four 
hundred and fifty in the whole kingdom and those who held office 
were deprived of the fuero for official malfeasance; in cases not of 
faith the use of torture was prohibited as well as confinement in 
the secret prison; all cases, whether civil or criminal, were to be 
concluded within two years; fraudulent alienation of property to 
officials, so as to place it under the fuero, was declared invalid; 
all persons or bodies, in case of violation of these provisions, had 
the right to avail themselves of all remedies known to the laws of 
the land, while to the tribunal was reserved the power to employ 
censures and other legal processes. A concession was made by 
eranting to both officials and familiars the right of asylum in 
their houses, relief from billeting, exemption from arrest for debt, 
capacity to hold office and freedom from tolls, ferriages, etc. In 
return for this the Cértes were liberal with the servicio, agreeing 
to keep in the field two thousand foot and five hundred horse for 
four years, paying them two reales a day, while the king should 
find them in food, arms and horses.? 

In these conditions there was nothing affecting the faith or 
restricting the persecution of heresy; nothing save a prudent 
regard for the peace and protection of society from the intolerable 
burden of gangs of virtual bandits clothed in inviolability. Yet 
Philip resisted to the last extremity these reasonable concessions, 
which merely placed Aragon on the same footing as Castile. 
We are told that he declared that he cherished the Inquisition as 
the apple of his eye and that he exhausted every means to pre- 
serve its privileges. He offered to concede everything else that 
was asked; he endeavored to win the Aragonese by bribing them 
with royal grants and graces, of which three hundred and sixty 
were published in a single day, with the names of the recipients, 


’ Bibl. nacional, MSS., Mm, 122. 
* Fueros y Actos de Corte en 1645 y 1646, pp. 1-2, 11-12 (Zaragoza, 1647). 


Cuap. IV] ARAGON 461 


but nothing could overcome the hatred felt for the Holy Office 
and the brazos were immovable. In his perplexity he appealed 
to his usual counsellor, the mystic Sor Maria de Agreda, affirming 
his determination to uphold the Inquisition, and he must have 
been surprised when that clear-sighted woman advised him to 
compromise, for a quarrel with Aragon might turn it to the side 
of Catalonia and lead to the permanent disruption of the mon- 
archy. Even this failed to move him. He endeavored to depart 
for Madrid, but deputation after deputation was sent to the con- 
vent of Santa Engracia where he was lodged, insisting on his con- 
firmation of the articles and detaining him for two or three days 
while his coach stood ready at the gate, until at last he yielded, 
seeing that there was no alternative. The writer who records 
this adds that the people rejoiced and since then in Aragon, 
where the Inquisition had stood higher than elsewhere, for an 
inquisitor was regarded with more reverence than an archbishop 
or a viceroy, it has so fallen in estimation that some say that 
all is over with it. The officials and familiars feel this every day 
in the withdrawal of their privileges and exemptions, and it is 
palpable that in all that does not concern the faith, the ancient 
powers of the tribunal of Aragon are prostrated.’ 

It was not long before the sullen yielding of the Inquisition to 
the changed situation was manifested in a case which did not 
_tend to restore it to reverence. Inquisitor Lazaeta was involved 
in an intrigue with a married woman of San Anton, whose hus- 
. band, a Catalan named Miguel Choved, grew suspicious and pre- 
tended to take a journey. Lazaeta fell into the trap. October 
27, 1647, he went to the house at nightfall, leaving his coach in 
hiding behind the shambles; the coachman waited for him in 
vain, for the injured husband had entered by a side-door and 
given him a sword-thrust of which he died in the street, while 
stumbling forward in search of his coach. The woman escaped 
and Choved disappeared, but some demonstration was necessary 
and the tribunal arrested one Francisco Arnal as an accessory. 
The court of the Justicia issued a manifestacion in his favor, 
when the inquisitors complained of the interference with their 
functions of such orders and that the tribunal could not be main- 
tained if they were to be banished and their temporalities be 
seized whenever they judged that a case was not comprehended 


1 Bibl. nacional, MSS., D, 118, fol. 122 (see Appendix).—Joaquin Sanchez de 
Toca, Felipe IV y Sor Marfa de Agreda, p. 282 (Madrid, 1887). 


462 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox IL 


within the fueros. To this the Council of Aragon replied that the 
court of the Justicia always acted with great caution and that, in 
the present case, Arnal had renounced the manifestacion and had 
been returned to the tribunal, which had found him innocent and 
had discharged him. The Suprema insisted that it would be 
better to remove the tribunal from Aragon than to have it sub- 
jected to such insults, to which the Council rejoined that there 
was no admission of firmas and manifestaciones except in matters 
not of faith; if the inquisitors would keep within their just limits, 
such troubles would be avoided, while, if they exceeded them, 
the kingdom must avail itself of the remedies provided by the 
laws.’ Now in this case the tribunal was strictly within its rights 
under the Concordia and its abstention from excommunication 
and interdict indicates how thoroughly it was humbled. 

Another grievance of the Inquisition shows how completely 
the tables were turned. September 23, 1648, the Suprema repre- 
sented in a consulta that the tribunal had been notified to reduce 
the number of its officials and familiars to the prescribed four 
hundred and fifty, which had not been done under the plea that 
the number was insufficient, that the Concordia did not order 
the dismissal of the overplus and that the incumbents could not 
be deprived of their rights. Still there was little doubt that per- 
sistent refusal would lead the Diputados to obtain a firma com- 
pelling a selection and until this was done no familiar would be 
allowed to enjoy their privileges—in fact a number of towns had 
already assumed this position and others were taking steps to . 
obtain firmas. The Suprema endeavored to show the illegality 
of this on the ground that the Concordia of 1646 was not valid in 
the absence of confirmation by the inquisitor-general. Philip 
submitted this to the Council of Aragon and merely transmitted 
its answer, in non-committal fashion, to the Suprema for its 
information. This took the ground that only the secular and 
royal jurisdiction was concerned; the king had confirmed the 
laws which provided that the acquiescence of the inquisitor- 
general was unnecessary; if parties were aggrieved they could 
apply to the court of the Justicia.’ 

Under these conditions, the laws of 1646, by restricting the 


? Archivo gén. de la C. de Aragon, Leg. 528.—Llorente tells us (Hist. crit., 
Cap. xxxviii, Art. 1, n. 27) that Choved (or Gobea) was caught and tried but 
escaped the gallows by steadfast denial under repeated torture. 

? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 37, fol. 379. 


Cuap. IV] ARAGON 463 


tribunal to its proper functions, were a severe blow to its pre- 
dominance, diminishing the terror which it inspired and affecting 
in some degree its finances. The continual suits brought before 
it had afforded a rich harvest of fees for its officials and the fines 
imposed had been a resource to its treasury. All this fell off 
greatly and, in 1649, the Suprema reminded Philip that, in 1646, 
it had predicted this result and he had promised indemnification 
by a fixed income to be paid by Aragon or by the royal treasury; 
although it did not regard the laws as binding in the absence of 
confirmation by the inquisitor-general, and had resisted their 
execution in every way, still they were executed and the officials 
were suffering keenly from their diminished fees, wherefore it 
asked the king to grant to the four notaries and messengers eight 
hundred ducats a year out of the fund for the Catalan refugees. 
This demand, and the impudent assertion of the nullity of the 
laws which he had approved, provoked Philip into one of his rare 
assertions of kingship. The Catalan fund, he replied, could not 
be touched; he would listen to other suggestions for the relief of 
the incumbents but not of their successors; he was master of the 
secular jurisdiction granted to the Inquisition for his service and 
could make laws and abrogate them at his pleasure.’ 

Philip had learned a lesson and the laws of 1646 were duly 
executed. When, in 1677, there was another convocation of the 
Cértes of Aragon, the Suprema, in a suppliant tone contrasting 
strongly with its former arrogance, begged Carlos II to influence 
them to condescend to a modification. It gave a most dolorous 
account of the condition of the Saragossa tribunal resulting from 
that legislation. It forebore to discuss whether the officials had 
given just cause of complaint, but the total destruction of the 
Inquisition was curing one malady by introducing a worse one, 
and the Inquisition of Aragon had been destroyed. The number 
of officials was reduced below that at the time of its foundation, 
and its poverty was so great that wages were unpaid and the 
tribunal would probably have to be abandoned. The treasurer 
was compelled to collect its income and debts through the court 
of the Justicia, where it was impossible for him to carry on so 
many suits, so that only those paid whose consciences compelled 
them. The reduction of the officials impeded its usefulness; 
possibly there were fewer culprits but certainly there were fewer 
convictions—less in Aragon than in the other provinces—and a 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 38, fol. 22. 


464 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox IIL 


single one who escaped correction was a matter of greater conse- 
quence to God than the enjoyment of the fuero by five hundred 
persons. It was impossible to fill the allotted number of familiars, 
for the fuero in criminal matters left to them was rather a dis- 
advantage, for they died in prison owing to the interminable 
delays in settling the numerous competencias, while other defend- 
ants were released on bail. At the same time the deprivation of 
the active fuero exposed them to the effects of the general hatred 
felt for them. It was inconceivable that, in so pious a nation, this 
hatred could be caused by their functions, but its existence was 
a matter of experience and, in the absence of protection, the risks 
to which it exposed them prevented men from seeking the posi- 
tion. The Inquisition did not desire jurisdiction, but it could 
not exist without revenue and officials, and it therefore prayed 
the king that proper measures of relief be discussed in the Cértes, 
or a junta could be formed from both parties and a new Con- 
cordia be framed. Even allowing for customary exaggeration, 
this paper shows how greatly the Inquisition had outgrown the 
functions for which it had been imposed upon the people. 


The concessions asked for were singularly moderate—that the 


treasurer should not be required to make collections through 
the court of the Justicia, that more familiars be allowed—though 
it had just been said that they could not be had—that they be 
admitted to bail during competencias, and a timid suggestion 
respecting the firma and manifestacion. The time, however, was 
not propitious even for demands so modest. The youthful Carlos 
II had just relegated his mother to a convent and her favorite 
Valenzuela to the Philippines; all power was in the hands of Don 
Juan of Austria, who held the inquisitor-general Valladares to 
be his personal enemy. The appeal of the Suprema was received 
unsympathetically and it seems to have gained nothing. That the 
Aragonese were content with the situation appears from the fact 
that the only complaint made by the Cortes regarded the non- 
observance of a law of 1646 prescribing the number of natives 
to be employed by the tribunal, and this arose merely from 
greed of office, for they suggested that, for each foreigner appointed 
in Aragon, an Aragonese should have a corresponding berth in a 
tribunal elsewhere.' 

The legislation of 1646 remained a finality. As late as 1741 
the Suprema remonstrated against the Audiencia of Saragossa 


1 Archivo gén. de la C. de Aragon, Legujo 528. 


ee 


Cuap. IV] CATALONIA 465 


for impeding the jurisdiction of the tribunal by employing the 
firma, which, with customary disingenuousness, it characterized 
as an innovation." 


Catalonia was as intractable as Aragon, while its more pro- 
nounced spirit of independence rendered it particularly trouble- 
some. Although it lacked the institution of the Justicia, it had 
a somewhat imperfect substitute in the Banch Reyal, or King’s 
Bench, which was used in the appeals por via de fuerza from the 
spiritual courts. The Audiencia summoned the ecclesiastical 
judge before it and his disregard of the summons was followed 
by a decree of banishment and seizure of temporalities. The 
inquisitors denied their liability to this, the Catalans asserted it, 
and the endeavor to enforce it was a serious cause of quarrel. 
It was not without influence, for a memorial, in 1632, from the 
inquisitors complains that the Duke of Maqueda, when viceroy 
in 1592, had employed it against the tribunal, since when the 
veneration felt for the latter had greatly declined, and a com- 
plaint of the Catalan authorities to Carlos II, in 1695, describes 
it as the sole refuge and protection of the people from the oppres- 
sion of the inquisitors and ecclesiastical judges. 

We have already seen the Concordia reached in 1512, abolish- 
ing most of the then existing abuses; how it was sworn to by 
king, inquisitor-general and inquisitors, and how a similar oath 
was to be taken by all future inquisitors; how Leo X obligingly 
released them all from their oaths; how Ferdinand, just before 
his death, accepted the conditions, in December, 1515, and the 
complaisant pontiff, in the bull Pastoralis officti, confirmed them, 
and how Barcelona, in return, bound itself to a yearly subven- 
tion of six hundred ducats. It is well to recall these facts in view 
of the bare-faced denials with which subsequently the Catalan 
complaints of non-observance were persistently met. Even 
while the papal dispensation from the oaths was still in force, 
the Instructions issued by Inquisitor-general Mercader, in 1514, 
prescribed rules which, if observed, would have removed the 
leading causes of complaint. Any official or familiar committing 
a crime deserving of corporal punishment was to be denounced 
to him, when he would dismiss the culprit and punish the inquis- 


' Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 27, fol. 242. 
? Tbidem, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Leg. 17, fol. 15.—Archivo gén. de 
la C. de Aragon, Leg. 708. 
30 


466 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


itor who tolerated it. The civil suits of officials were to be brought 
in the court of the defendant; if the official was plaintiff, all pro- 
ceedings before an inquisitor were pronounced invalid and both 
official and inquisitor were to be punished; even when both par- 
ties to a contract agreed to accept the forum of the tribunal, 
inquisitors were forbidden, under pain of punishment, to enter- 
tain the case. Secular officials could arrest familiars caught in 
the act. Officials were forbidden to engage in trade, even through 
third parties, and were deprived of the fuero for all matters thence 
arising, and similarly if they purchased claims subject to suits, 
nor could they employ other officials to collect debts connected 
with their private estates... Although these Instructions were in 
force for only a year or two, they have interest as manifesting 
Ferdinand’s purpose that the Holy Office should not be dis- 
tracted from its legitimate functions or be used to oppress his 
subjects or to minister to private greed. He could, at the same 
time, believe that it required special privileges, for it did not as 
yet inspire awe in so turbulent a population. In that same year, 
1514, at Lérida, the inquisitor Canon Antist was besieged in his 
house and the assailants were with difficulty beaten off, after 
which they defiantly walked the streets, uttering challenges to 
his defenders.’ 

A further victory was gained by the Catalans at the Cortes 
of Monzon in 1520, when, on December 28th, Cardinal Adrian, 
in the most solemn manner, not only swore to observe the articles 
of 1512 but presented for attestation a document from Queen 
Juana and Charles V, promising investigation and redress of 
charges brought against certain officials, and enacting that, to 
prevent such abuses for the future, all offences disconnected with 
the faith, committed by officials, should be tried by the ordinary 
courts, thus depriving them of the much-prized criminal passive 
fuero. This, too, Adrian swore to observe when the necessary 
papal confirmation should be obtained—a confirmation which 
the Inquisition probably had sufficient influence to prevent, as 
there appears to be no further trace of it.’ 

The articles of 1512 thus were a compact in which the Catalans, 
the king, the Inquisition and the pope all joined in the most 


' Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 933. 

? Ibidem, Lib. 3, fol. 308, 309; Lib. 72, fol. 2. 

* Pragmaticas y altres Drets de Cathalunya, Lib. n, Tit. viii, 3 3—Archivo de 
Simancas, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Leg. 17, fol. 39, 41. 


Cuap. IV] CATALONIA 467 


solemn manner, pledging all future inquisitors to swear to them. 
For a while this latter clause was observed. Fernando Loazes, 
who was inquisitor of Barcelona for twenty years from about 
1533, took the oath, but he was promptly involved in a quarrel 
with the magistrates in which Juan de Cardona, Bishop-elect of 
Barcelona, was induced, as papal commissioner, to prosecute him 
for perjury, and after that no inquisitor took the oath.’ In this 
they were wise for they emancipated themselves completely from 
the Concordia. The Cortes of 1547 complained of the inordinate 
multiplication of familiars, over the thirty allowed by it, and of 
the neglect to furnish lists or other means for their identification, 
together with other infractions, but Prince Philip replied that he 
would consult ‘the Suprema and would reach appropriate con- 
clusions, which of course ended the matter.2 How completely 
the provisions of the Concordia were ignored is manifest in 1551, 
when Catalina Murciana asked relief in the veguer’s court from 
suits brought against her in the Inquisition by the fiscal, the 
Abbot of Besali, when she was entitled to her own court. On 
refusal of redress by the inquisitor, Juan Arias, a monitorio was 
obtained from the Banch Reyal, whereupon Arias threw the 
officials of the veguer’s court into prison and kept them there. 
The matter was carried up to the Royal Councils with the result 
that the judges of the Audiencia were ordered to erase all record 
of the affair from their dockets and appear in person before the 
inquisitor to report to him that it was duly expunged.’ 

Thus supported by the monarch, the tribunal exercised its 
powers at discretion without regard to compacts. The report, 
in 1561, by Inquisitor Gaspar Cervantes of the visitation which 
he had just completed, describes the disorders which had long 
reigned in all departments. The last visitation had been made 
in 1550 and its recommendations had been wholly ignored. It 
had ordered a reduction in the number of familiars and that lists 
of them be sent to the Suprema, which had not been done; in 
fact the tribunal itself had kept no correct register; it had a hun- 
dred and eight names recorded for Barcelona, but when they 
were ordered to present their papers under penalty of being 
dropped, only sixty-eight of these came forward, while there were 
thirty-one who were not registered. The number, he said, should 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Leg. 17, fol. 5. 
? Constitutions de Cathalunya superfluas, Lib. 1, Tit. iv (Barcelona, 1589) 
3 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 930, fol. 49.—Portocarrero, 3 78. 


468 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


be reduced and more care be exercised in the selection; many of 
the laymen were bandits and the clerics were men of bad char- 
acter, who sought the office to obtain exemption from their pre- 
lates. All this resulted in so much secular business that it seemed 
to be the real duty of the tribunal and that nothing else was 
attended to—in fact there was so little to do in matters of faith 
that the inquisitors could well be spared from Barcelona and 
employ themselves in visiting their district. All this is expli- 
cable by the exorbitance of the fees charged, about which there 
was much complaint. There was no authorized fee-bill. In civil 
cases the inquisitors charged from two and a half to ten per cent. 
on the amount at issue, depending on its magnitude, with a 
maximum of seventy-five libras; in criminal cases they received 
nothing but had the opportunity of inflicting fines. The officials 
had fees for every act, drawing and copying papers, serving 
notices, summoning witnesses, levying executions, etc., etc., and 
there was a standing quarrel between the notaries of the three 
departments—of the secreto, or tribunal of faith, of sequestra- 
tions and of the juzgado, or court of confiscations—as to which 
should have the business.’ 

That the Cértes of Monzon, in 1563-4, should protest ener- 
getically against these abuses was natural. Indeed, a Catalan 
named Gaspar Mercader carried the protest so far as to say, 
among other odious things, that the Inquisition had been intro- 
duced only for a limited time which had expired and that it 
should be abolished, for which the tribunal arrested, tried and 
punished him.? In spite of this interference with the freedom 
of debate, the general disaffection, as we have seen, led to the 
visitation of de Soto Salazar. In Barcelona he found that 
not the slightest attention had been paid to the orders of the 
Suprema based on the report of Cervantes. Advocates, familiars 
_and commissioners continued to be appointed in profusion, with- 
out investigation as to fitness. When an inquisitor visited his 
district he carried with him blank commissions which he dis- 
tributed at will. All these, with their families, were protected 
and defended by the tribunal in civil and criminal cases, nor 
was this all, for it would seem that any one who claimed the 
fuero, whether he was entitled to it or not, was admitted and, 
in the absence of lists filed with the magistrates, the latter had 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Visitas de Barcelona, Leg. 15, fol. 2. 
? Ibidem, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cortes, Leg. 17, fol. 9. 


_Cuar. IV] CATALONIA 469 


no means of resisting the arrogant and peremptory demand of 
the tribunal to surrender cases. Instances were given which 
showed that the tribunal was a court where justice—or rather 
injustice—was bought and sold and there had been no reform 
in the excessive fees which had seandalized Cervantes.’ 

That it should be hated was inevitable. In 1566, Govilla, 
Bishop of Elna, defending himself for acts committed when he 
was inquisitor of Barcelona, declared that the Inquisition was 
even more odious in Catalonia than elsewhere. This hatred 
sometimes expressed itself more forcibly than by complaints. 
In 1567, the evocation of a case, which the local authorities 
claimed as their own, led to the fiercest excitement which the 
viceroy fruitlessly sought to allay and appealed to Philip II for 
his immediate interposition. Disregarding the inviolable secrecy 
of the Inquisition, the Diputados, with the veguer, forced their 
way into the palace, penetrated to the audience-chamber where 
the inquisitors were trying a case, and inventoried and seques- 
trated everything, even to the private property of the Inquisitor 
Padilla in his apartments—apparently a seizure of temporalities 
under an order of the Banch Reyal. Even more flagrant was the 
insult committed when the messenger and the secretary were 
conveying from Perpignan to Barcelona two government officials 
accused of impeding the Inquisition and also a prisoner under a 
charge of heresy. Near Gerona, one of the Diputados, at the 
head of-an armed band, seized the whole party and carried them 
back to Perpignan, where they were paraded through the streets 
with blare of trumpets, as though criminals on the way to execu- 
tion, and were then cast into prison, where they lay until dis- 
charged without accusation. This was a most serious assault on 
the dignity of the Holy Office and even worse was permitting 
the escape of the heretic, but it was obliged to submit without 
vindicating its authority.® 

Such being the temper of the Catalans and such the provoca- 
tion to meet lawlessness with lawlessness, it is not surprising 
that, when the Concordia of 1568 was prepared for the three 
kingdoms, Catalonia would have none of it. When, in September, 
it was submitted to the Diputados, they were incensed and 
proposed to send envoys to the king to remonstrate against it. 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Visitas de Barcelona, Leg. 15, fol. 20. 
2 Ibidem, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Leg. 17, fol. 74. 
3 Tbidem, fol. 20, 81. 


470 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


There was a universal outcry that it was contrary to the consti- 
tution and privileges of the land; they would observe it in so far 
as it was in their favor, but as to the rest they were ready to lose 
life, property and children rather than to submit to it. In Feb- 
ruary, 1569, the inquisitors wrote that the people would not be 
content until they had driven the Inquisition from the land; as 
for themselves they proposed to go on as they had previously 
done until the Concordia should be accepted, to which the 
Suprema cordially assented.’ 

This attitude of mutual defiance was not conducive to peace. 
In 1570, there arose a quarrel so bitter that the Diputados 
invoked the protection and interposition of Pius V, and he urged 
Philip II to come to some understanding with them, in view of 
possible serious consequences. Philip took the position that they 
were so excited and so obstinate that any concessions would lead 
only to further demands, but he asked the pope to dismiss the 
envoys, referring them to him with recommendation for favor- 
able consideration, so that anything that he might yield would 
be to the Holy See and not to recalcitrant subjects. The situa- 
tion was critical; the rebellion of Granada was exhausting his 
resources, there was acute apprehension of attack by a Turkish 
fleet and the Catalans were soon afterwards called upon to con- 
tribute to the defence of the coasts, but if any concessions were 
enforced on the Inquisition they have left no traces. In fact, the 
Venetian envoy, Leonardo Donato, in his relation of 1573, states 
that, after the Catalans had spent a hundred thousand ducats in 
these efforts, the Inquisition imprisoned those who had been 
most active in the matter and that they subsequently refused to 
leave the prison without a formal declaration that they had not 
been arrested for heresy.? Dissension naturally continued. In 
1572 we hear of a demand from the Diputados that the inquisitors 
should show them their commissions and take an oath to obey 
the constitution of Catalonia, because they held rents on the 
Diputacion; the inquisitors acceded to the first of these and were 
rebuked by the Suprema because it was a demand that had been 
persistently refused before and they must not do it again. Then, 
in 1574, there came a complaint from all the cities that familiars 


* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 65, fol. 184. 
* Valladares, Semanario ertidito, XXVIII, 219.—Salgado de Somoza, de Reten- 


tione Bullarum, P. II, cap. xxxiii, n. 137-8.—Relazioni Venete, Serie I, T. VI, 
p. 367, 


Cuap. IV] CATALONIA 471 


refused obedience to the local laws respecting prices, pasturage 
and other matters as required under the Concordia, to which the 
Suprema superciliously replied by instructing the inquisitors 
that, as the people had rejected the Concordia, they need not 
observe it. Then, in 1585, as we have seen (p. 416) the Cortes 
obtained an advantage in excluding familiars and officials from 
public offices. 

In this spirit of undisguised hostility both sides were aligned 
for a decisive struggle in the Cértes of 1599, under the new 
royalty of the youthful Philip III. As the Catalan efforts failed 
and the Inquisition was left in possession of its usurped powers, 
the details of the contest have no interest except as an exhibition 
of shameless duplicity, by which the king tricked his vassals. 
They hoped to win favor by a subsidio of a million libras to the 
king and a hundred thousand to his bride, besides shrewdly 
granting ten thousand to the Marquis of Denia (soon to become 
Duke of Lerma) and six thousand to the Vice-chancellor of 
Aragon,’ but they reaped nothing but deceit. Long discussions 
resulted in a series of articles, divided into two categories, to 
one of which Philip gave unqualified assent and to the other his 
assent as far as concerned himself, with a promise to procure 
that of the inquisitor-general and pope. It was proposed to 
withhold the pension of six hundred libras granted in 1520, if 
the papal confirmation were not procured within a year, but 
Philip declared that no such guarantee was necessary, for the 
letters which he had ordered to be written to the pope were so 
strong that no influence could counteract them. His despatches 
to his ambassador were sent through the Diputados in order to 
satisfy them, but they assuredly were not allowed to see others 
which instructed the ambassador to be circumspect in urging 
the matter. He also sent word to the inquisitor-general that the 
delivery of these despatches had been delayed in order to give 
him time to express his views. The Suprema, in appealing to 
Clement VIII to withhold confirmation, did not hesitate to say 
that Philip had endeavored to escape under cover of the inquis- 
itor-general and pope and had finally signed only in so far as 
concerned himself. Indeed, in a subsequent official paper, 1t was 
unblushingly asserted that he had done so only to get rid of the 
Catalans. Under these influences it is needless to say that the 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 82, fol. 52; Lib. 65, fol. 184. 
? Cabrera, Relaciones, p. 31. 


472 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


confirmation never came and the subsidio was the only practical 
result of the labors of the Cértes.’ 

One of the articles required the execution of the Concordia of 
1520, which embraced that of 1512, the fulfilment of which the 
Catalans had never ceased to demand, and the manner in which 
these solemn compacts were argued away is instructive. In 
1566, Govilla, Bishop of Elna, who had been inquisitor of Bar- 
celona, calmly asserted that the articles of 1512 had been revoked 
as prejudicial to the free exercise of the Inquisition. The Su- 
prema, in urging Clement VIII to refuse confirmation of the new 
Concordia of 1599, argued that the transactions of 1512 and 1520 
were invalid through simony, as the Cortes had obtained the assent 
of Ferdinand in 1516 (stc) and of Charles in 1520 by conditioning 
subsidios on it. Leo’s bull of condemnation in 1513 was relied 
upon and that of confirmation in 1516 was dismissed as obrepti- 
tious and surreptitious. So Cardinal Adrian’s action in 1520 was 
represented as conditional on confirmation by the Holy See, and 
as in no way binding on the Inquisition. So, in 1632, the Bar- 
celona tribunal drew up a statement to be laid before Philip IV 
by the Suprema, adroitly mixing up the affairs of Aragon and 
Catalonia and telling him that the Cortes of 1518 demanded the 
revival of the articles of 1512, that Charles refused to swear to 
them, that Juan Prat interpolated others, for which he was 
imprisoned and that the effort failed. In transmitting this the 
Suprema added that the fact that the Cértes never ceased to 
demand the enforcement of the articles showed that they had 
never been observed.? From first to last it was a history of 
deception, in which kings conspired with inquisitors to betray 
their subjects, without even the excuse that the faith was con- 
cerned in these details of secular jurisdiction. 

The Catalan temper was not soothed by the disappointment 
of 1599, and the refusal of redress prompted resort to forcible 
measures. There was a contest in 1608 in which the Banch Reyal 
uttered a sentence of banishment against the inquisitors; a vessel 
was made ready for their deportation but, when the day came, 
they barred their door and hung over it a portiére of black velvet 
to which was attached a crucifix. The city showed its piety by 


1 Constitutions fets en la primera Cort celebra als Cathalans en lo any de 1599 
(Barcelona, 1603).—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Leg. 
17, fol. 2, 5, 28. 

? Archivo de Simanceas, loc. cit., pp. 2, 5, 44. 


Cuar. IV] CATALONIA 473 


placing candles in front of the sacred emblem and the chapter sent 
priests to pray before it. No one ventured to disturb it; the 
Diputados, the chapter and the city authorities interposed, and 
an accommodation was reached." A more savage quarrel arose, 
in 1611, in consequence of the veguer disarming the coachman 
of an inquisitor. The city authorities seized the temporalities, 
laid siege to the palace of the Inquisition, sentenced the inquis- 
itors to banishment and proclaimed it with trumpets through the 
streets. This they justified to the king by telling him that the 
Holy Office had been instituted for a limited term which had 
expired, so that it should be abolished in Catalonia and the cog- 
nizance of matters of faith be restored to the episcopal courts, 
all of which, we are told, gave his majesty much concern.? 
Mutual detestation did not diminish and, when the Cortes of 
1626 were approaching, the inquisitors anxiously urged the Su- 
prema to impress upon the king that the peace and preservation 
of Catalonia depended upon the maintenance of their temporal 
jurisdiction. The deputies, they said, were holding daily juntas 
and accumulating stores of documents from the archives, assert- 
ing that the time had expired for which the Inquisition was 
instituted, and if they accomplish their intention they will destroy 
it wholly. That they were really alarmed is visible in their ask- 
ing the Suprema to secure some compromise. The Suprema duly 
represented the danger to Philip IV, who in reply gave assurance 
that no prejudicial change would be approved, for his unceasing 
desire was to promote the exaltation of the Inquisition. After 
the Cortes had assembled, the tribunal reported, June 27th, that 
they had drawn up a series of articles effectually disabling the 
jurisdiction ‘of the Inquisition and that they declare that they 
will not vote a subsidio until the king shall have confirmed them. 
The articles deemed so obnoxious scarce amounted to more than 
the Concordia of Castile so long in force, save provisions that the 
inquisitors should be Catalans and should take an oath to obey 
the laws, and that disputes of jurisdiction should be settled by 
a junta consisting of an inquisitor, a judge of the Audiencia and 
the Bishop of Barcelona. Moderate as they were, Philip kept 
his promise and referred them, September 23d, to Diego de Guz- 
man, Archbishop of Seville, acting head of the Suprema in the 


? Bofarull y Broca, Historia de Catalufia, VII, 282-3. 
? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Leg. 17, fol. 9, 67. 


474 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boor II 


vacancy of the inquisitor-generalship, so that, on the adjourn- 
ment of the Cértes, the whole matter remained suspended.* 

An attempt at compromise was made in what was known as 
the Concordia of Cardinal Zapata, arranged, December 24, 1630, 
between him as inquisitor-general and the Council of Aragon. 
This made no substantial change in the jurisdiction of the Inqui- 
sition but was directed chiefly to restraining the misuse of excom- 
munication on the one side and the recourse to the Banch Reyal 
on the other, by providing that all disputed cases should be 
settled by competencias conducted according to the received 
form of procedure, under penalty for a first offence of five hun- 
dred ducats on the tribunal refusing, and suspension from office 
for asecond. This left untouched the roots of trouble and accom- 
plished little, in consequence, it is said, of the delays and evasions 
of the inquisitors, and-frequent recourse continued to the Banch 
Reyal, especially by creditors.’ 

The Cortes of 1626 had not been dissolved and they met again 
in 1632 to conclude their unfinished business. As usual, the 
tribunal and the Suprema prepared for the struggle by earnest 
appeals to Philip, who responded with assurances of special care 
in all that concerned the Inquisition. The Suprema had the 
hardihood to tell him that the Concordia of 1512, on which the 
Catalans based their claims, had never been confirmed, but it 
was within the truth when it said that it had never been observed. 
It declared moreover that the articles framed by the Cértes would 
so prostrate the tribunal that 1t would have to cease its functions. 
A memorial by the secretary of the tribunal, Miguel Rodriguez, 
gives a deplorable account of the social condition of Catalonia, 
where the barons and gentlemen, the cities and church founda- 
tions, he says, possessed excessive powers and where the bishops 
were also barons. The hostility of the nobles and cities to the 
familiars was manifested by the daily murders committed on 
them and their children and the burning of their houses. But 
for the protection of the Inquisition they would be exterminated, 
for its jurisdiction was the only one respected. Fathers endured 
the murder of their sons, sons that of their fathers and wives that 


' Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 30, fol. 474; Inquisicion de Barce- 
lona, Cértes, Leg. 17, fol. 18, 67, 87. 

? Archivo de la Corona de Aragon, Fondos del Consejo de Aragon, Leg. 708. 
—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 21, fol. 84.—MSS. of Library of Univ. 
of Halle, Ye, 17. 


Cuap. IV] CATALONIA 475 


of their husbands, for fear of greater evils and, in addition to this, 
was the turbulent temper of the population. The viceroys had 
nominal power, but it was exercised only on the common folk 
and not on the powerful, whom no one dared to accuse or to bear 
witness against. All this busy preparation was superfluous; the 
Cértes were dissolved without gaining their object.’ 

The Inquisiton, as usual, had triumphed, but peace was impos- 
sible between the incompatible claims of rival jurisdictions. In 
1637 the Suprema complained of the continuous series of troubles 
and of the disregard of the Concordia of Zapata. This time the 
offender was the viceroy, the powerful Duke of Cardona, who 
had imprisoned a familiar for carrying a pistol and refusing to 
surrender it, and had arrested two servants of the receiver, fining 
one and discharging the other. When the tribunal sent to him 
a priest bearing a monitorio with excommunication, he shut the 
priest up, i2comunicado, in a room of the palace. Then he invited 
to dinner the fiscal of the tribunal and shut him up likewise. He 
ordered the inquisitor to withdraw the excommunication and, on 
his refusal, he pronounced sentence of banishment, posted four 
hundred men around the Inquisition and made ready a vessel to 
carry him to Majorca. The inquisitor assembled five bishops 
who declared that Cardona had incurred the excommunication 
of the bull Sz de protegendis and the inquisitor so declared him, 
though for the avoidance of scandal he forbore to publish it. 
Under the intervention of the bishops the sentences of banish- 
ment and excommunication were mutually withdrawn, and the 
viceroy released the priest and fiscal, boasting that he had car- 
ried his point. Thereupon the Suprema asked the king to execute 
on Cardona/the penalties of the Concordia of Zapata and greater 
ones in view of his unprecedented acts and also that the ipso 
jacto censures-of the canon Sz quis suadente and the bull Sv de 
protegendis be published in order that he might seek the salvation 
of his soul. To this the weary king could only reply by deprecat- 
ing these unseemly quarrels and ordering that viceroys should 
not try the cases of familiars—Cardona apparently having under- 
taken to do this only because there was no other authority that 
ventured to do so, although the offence was one which forfeited 
the fuero.” Soon after this, in 1639, a still more serious trouble 


' Parets, Sucesos de Catalufia (Mem. hist. espafiol, XX, 91).—Archivo de 
Simancas, Inquisicion de Barcelona, Cértes, Leg. 17, fol. 15, 18, 19. 
? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 21, fol. 83. 


476 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


broke out in Tortosa, in which the magistrates were involved 
and the people rose against the Inquisition, but while this was in 
progress the Catalan rebellion broke out and prudence counselled 
abstention from severe measures of repression.’ 

Whatever share the Inquisition may have had in stimulating 
the disaffection that led to the rebellion, the unredressed griev- 
ances which so excited the Cortes nowhere appear on the surface. 
The proximate cause, as has been stated above, was the burning of 
the churches of Montiréd and Rio de Arenas by the Neapolitan 
troops quartered on the people; some consecrated hosts were 
found reduced to coals and the peasants, who had suffered from 
the outrages of the unpaid soldiery, rose in arms, cut them off in 
detail, styled themselves the Exercit Christid and bore on their 
banners the Venerable Sacrament, with the legend ‘‘Senor judi- 
cau vostra causa” and claimed that their object was to protect 
the people and defend the Catholic faith. In fact, the Inquisition 
was invited to prosecute the guilty authors of the sacrilege and 
undertook to do so, but of course the culprits could not be iden- 
tified and it was reduced to excommunicating them in bulk. It 
was against the representatives of the king that the initial riots 
of June 7 and 8, 1640, were directed, when the judges of the 
royal Audiencia and the Viceroy, the Count of Santa Coloma, 
were murdered. The inquisitors at once proffered their services 
to the Diputados and, at the request of the latter, they wrote to the 
king and inquisitor-general praising the efforts of the Diputados to 
preserve peace, not knowing that for months they had been organ- 
izing the rebellion in correspondence with France. When too, in 
September, a tax was laid to put the land in a state of defence, 
the assent of the tribunal was asked as to levying it on familiars.? 

There was thus no open hostility towards the Inquisition, but, 
at the same time, there was no respect for its inviolability. When 
the mob rose again on Christmas day, to put to death all Cas- 
tilians, there was a report that two thousand of them were con- 
cealed in the Inquisition. Led by a coachman of one of the 
inquisitors, the people broke into the Inquisition, maltreated the 
officials, hanged some of them, emptied the money chests and 


* Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 9, n. 1, fol. 561, 572, 
573, .575. 

 Parets, Sucesos de Catalufia (Mem. hist. espafiol, Tom. XX, 164-82; Append. 
299, 301, 318, 426; Tom. XXI, Append. 158, 193, 409; Tom. XXII, 10,27; Tom. 
XXV, Append. 290. 


Cuap. IV] CATALONIA 477 


found in the secret prison a solitary Castilian on trial for heresy. 
Him they carried to the town-council who returned him to the 
tribunal and garroted the coachman.' 

When, on January 23, 1641, terms of submission to France 
were concluded, the Inquisition was provided for. Having cut 
loose from Spain, it was impossible to permit the tribunal to 
remain subject to the Suprema in Madrid, and the clause respect- 
ing it was that all inquisitors and officials should be Catalans, 
jurisdiction should be restricted to matters of faith, and it should 
be directly under the Roman Congregation of the Holy Office? 
Still the inquisitors remained at their posts; for five months they 
had had no word from the Suprema; they expected to be called 
upon to take the oath of allegiance to King Louis and they sent 
their secretary, Juan de Eraso, to Madrid for instructions, sug- 
gesting that they had better move to Tarragona or Tortosa. 
Philip ordered them to remain and they resolutely obeyed, but 
the situation grew constantly worse and, on November 7th, they 
made another appeal, representing their danger, their destitution, 
their inability to perform their functions, and their expectation 
that they would be forced to kiss the hands of the Marshal de 
Brézé, the approaching French governor. This was confirmed 
by Don Antonio de Aragon, who had just returned from Barce- 
lona; on two occasions the mob had set fire to the Inquisition 
and heresy was rampant, for many of the French troops were 
Calvinists and Calvinism was openly preached. The Suprema 
characteristically debated the question under four heads—Shall 
the Inquisition be removed to Tarragona or Tortosa? Shall the 
inquisitors kiss the hands of the French governor? Does their 
lack of mearis to prosecute relieve them from prosecuting native 
or French heretics? Shall testimony against such heretics be taken 
in Madrid and action be based on it? After elaborate discussion 
the fourth question was decided in the affirmative and the other 
three in the negative. Juan de Mafiozca was appointed to gather 
testimony in Madrid, and the inquisitors were told to stand their 
eround and do their duty, using censures and interdict if neces- 
sary. If driven from the town, they were to carry with them the 
records so as to be able to work elsewhere.’ 


1 Parets, Tom. XXII, p. 30; Append. p. 243.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisi- 
cion, Lib. 33, fol. 675. 

* Parets, T. XXII, Append. pp. 308, 330; XXV, Append. pp. 391, 403. 

3 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 33, fol. 175, 830; Lib. 21, fol. 309. 


478 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


One of the inquisitors, Dr. Cotoner, had left Barcelona for his 
home in Majorca. The other two, with most of the officials, stood 
to their post and, in August, 1643, they were called upon to utter 
fearful curses on unknown parties supposed to have committed 
a sacrilegious theft of consecrated hosts... Towards the end of 
September, however, they were expelled, to give place to a native 
tribunal, and it was done with a refinement of cruelty. There were 
ten in all—seven subordinates and the son of one of them, besides 
the two inquisitors—who had stood faithful to their duty. They 
were put on board a vessel, with orders to land them in Portugal, 
which, like Catalonia, was in revolt against Spain. Although the 
crew consisted of Catalans and Frenchmen, they were persuaded 
to put into Cartagena, with a promise of being allowed to sell their 
cargo there. The reception of the refugees was most inhospit- 
able; the vessel was seized and the cargo and effects of passengers 
and crew were embargoed: much red tape had to be cut and it 
was not until December that the conclusion was reached that 
the crew had rendered an essential service exposing them to pun- 
ishment by the rebels, wherefore the vessel was released and they 
were allowed to dispose of the cargo.’ 

The refugees were without salaries or resources and it was 
not without difficulty and delay that the Suprema, professing its 
own inability to help them, secured from Philip some moderate 
ayudas de costa to keep them alive. Then, in March, 1644, it 
ordered them to open a tribunal at Tarragona, at the same time 
representing to the king that this would cost forty-five hundred 
ducats in silver for the first year, and four thousand annually 
thereafter, which might be supplied from the two millions of 
maravedis coming from the tribunal of Cartagena—apparently 
some recent large confiscation—as otherwise they would die of 
starvation. They were doubtless thus provided for and did what 
they could to restore the old-time dread of the Holy Office. It 
had sadly diminished in these evil days for, in this same year, 
1644, in the neighboring town of Tortosa, Inquisitor Roig of 
Valencia complained that, on reaching there during his visitation, 
the magistrates did not come to receive him, they assigned him 
no lodgings and they refused to publish his proclamation.*® 


1 Parets, Tom. XXIV, p. 316.—Archivo de Simancas, Lib. 65, fol. 41. 

2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 65, fol. 41, 48; Lib. 22, fol. 83. 

3 Tbidem, Lib. 65, fol. 31, 50; Lib. 36, fol. 74.—Archivo hist. nacional, Inqui- 
sicion de Valencia, Leg. 9, n. 2, fol. 323. 


Cuar. IV] CATALONIA 479 


Meanwhile, in accordance with the terms arranged with France, 
the Catalans had organized a national Inquisition. Doctor Paulo 
Ferran and Doctor Joseph Pla were appointed and application 
was made for the usual papal faculties. These were granted and, 
when the briefs were received, September 26, 1648, they were 
installed and the Castilians were expelled. The new tribunal 
had not much to do. It did not meddle with the Calvinists in 
the French armies, but it vindicated its authority by an auto de 
fe, celebrated February 23, 1644, in which one victim was gar- 
roted and burnt and there were two penitents. There was 
another, November 7, 1647, in which there was an execution for 
unnatural crime and six men and five women penitents, mostly 
for bigamy and sorcery. The only other evidence of activity 
that I have met is an investigation ordered by Pla, at the request 
of the parish priest of Pineda, resulting in the trial of Anthoni 
Morell.’ | 

When the troubles of the Fronde compelled Mazarin to with- 
draw the French armies, the rebellion collapsed, in spite of the 
obstinate determination of the Catalans to sever relations with 
Castile. When Barcelona surrendered, October 11, 1652, Cata- 
lonia was left at the mercy of the conqueror, but Philip, with 
true statesmanship, restored it to its ancient privileges and 
liberties, save a few exceptions which have no bearing on our 
subject.?, Inquisitor Pla had lingered at Gerona, continuing his 
functions in virtue of his papal brief. He was found there by the 
Marquis of Olias y Mortara, who only ventured to suspend him 
and wrote to the king, October 12, 1652, for instructions, adding 
that the prompt re-establishment of the Inquisition would con- 
duce greatly to the pacification of the land. The Council of 
Aragon, November 16th, approved of this and the next day 
Philip instructed the inquisitor-general to make the appointments 
and despatch the inquisitors at once.* There were financial diffi- 
culties, however. January 18, 1653, the Suprema reported the 
appointments; the infection of heresy by the French promised 
much work, but there was an utter lack of money; the tribunal 
would cost six thousand ducats a year, while its resources were 
but two thousand, for the separation of Roussillon lost it a 


1 Parets, T. XXIV, pp. 137, 147, 296.—Proceso contra Anthoni Morell (MSS. 
of Am. Philos. Society). 

+ Parets, Ts XXV, p. 142. 

8 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 38, fol. 390. 


480 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


thousand and it had two thousand more in Barcelona loans which 
were incollectable; there was prospect however of large confis- 
cations, for many Catalans had fled to France who would be 
prosecuted and, on the strength of this, the king was asked for 
four thousand a year.” The adjustment of these questions prob- 
ably required time, for it was not until August 2d that the new 
inquisitors took possession of their office, riding in state through 
the city, with drums and trumpets and the standard of the Holy 
Office, followed by all the familiars and officials of Barcelona, 
and making public proclamation in the customary places. The 
next day, Sunday, the Edict of Faith was read and on Monday 
they commenced their functions. Of the Catalan inquisitors, 
Pla died within a few days and Ferran was arrested at night as 
were many others, some of whom were sent to France and others 
were deported to Majorca. Apparently their official acts were 
not recognized, for familiars of their appointment continued for 
some years to apply for reinstatement.’ 

No sooner was the tribunal re-established than the old troubles 
recommenced. Abuses must have been flagrant to call forth from 
Philip, June 2, 1661, a cédula ordering the exact observance of 
the Concordias and restraining the excessive use of excommuni- 
cation.* The quarrels which arose were prolonged and compli- 
cated by every possible device. On February 15, 1664, Juan 
Matheu, actual receiver and acting alguazil mayor of the tri- 
bunal, was murdered. On most slender suspicion, the next day, 
it arrested Joseph Guimart and Joseph Massart; the Audiencia 
claimed the case and the tribunal refused to enter into a com- 
petencia until the Banch Reyal threatened the inquisitors with 
banishment. Then they averted the preliminary conference by 
questions of etiquette, repeatedly disregarding the orders of the 
Suprema, until the intervention of the queen-regent enforced 
obedience. The conference was at last held and the papers were 
transmitted to the Suprema and Council of Aragon to decide as 
to the jurisdiction. While this was pending, the inquisitors started 
another trouble. They had confined the prisoners in the secret 
prison as though guilty of heresy. This was a grievous hardship 
and the queen ordered them transferred to the common prison; 
the inquisitors reported that this had been done and then, on 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 65, fol. 81. 
? Parets, T. XXV, p. 171.—MSS. of Am. Philos. Society. 
8 MSS. of Library of Univ. of Halle, Ye, 17. 


Cuap. IV] CATALONIA 481 


pretext of information as to a plot to escape, brought them back 
to the secret prison. When the Suprema heard of this it wrote 
in a tone of mingled anger and fear, lest it should be discovered 
by the Council of Aragon; the prisoners must be moved back 
again; the affair had become too important, the Council of Aragon 
had made too many efforts and the queen imputed it all to the 
Suprema as they would see by her enclosed order. Then the 
competencia was suspended by the escape of the prisoners, 
March 9, 1666, and the last we hear of the matter is their nego- 
tiation for a pardon, in 1668, on terms of which the viceroy 
advised the acceptance, in order to avoid decision of the com- 
petencia. It was doubtless so settled, for competing jurisdic- 
tions had brought the administration of justice into such shape 
that it was better to let criminal accusations remain untried than 
to decide between the rival claims.’ 

These quarrels were not merely occasional but were continuous 
and perpetual. A letter of June 18, 1667, happens to mention 
that there were then four or five competencias delayed by the 
question whether in the conferences the royal judge should bring 
his own notary.? Perverted ingenuity was constantly devising 
new points over which strife could be created. Prisoners on trial 
in the royal gaols were sometimes borrowed by the tribunal to be 
prosecuted for blasphemy or other trivial offence against the faith. 
In 1666 a case of this kind gave rise to a question as to the exact 
form of receipt to be given for the body of the culprit, when it 
was pushed to such a point that the Suprema ordered the excom- 
munication of all the judges of the Audiencia, and the Council of 
Aragon complained to the queen-regent about the oppressive 
abuse of cehsures and asked her to provide that for the future 
the mutual obligations of the two tribunals should be equal and 
reciprocal.® 

When the Inquisition took such pains to make itself detested, 
one is scarce surprised to learn, from a complaint of the Suprema 
in 1677, that in Barcelona it had so fallen in public esteem that it 
was able to procure but one familiar and that the alguazil mayor 
had asked to be relieved from carrying his wand of office, for no 


1 Archivo gén. de la C. de Aragon, Fondos del Consejo, Leg. 708,—Libro XIII 
de Cartas (MSS. of Am. Philos. Society). 
2 Libro XIII de Cartas, p. 240. 
$ Bibl. nacional, MSS., PV, 3, n. 69.—Libro XIII de Cartas (ubi sup.). 
31 


482 CONFLICTING J URISDI CTIONS [Boox II 


noble was willing to be seen walking with him when he bore it.’ 
This hostility it continued carefully to cultivate. In December, 
1695, the Diputados and judges addressed to Carlos II a com- 
plaint of the multiplied excesses of the tribunal, which trampled 
on the laws and liberties of the land, causing such scandals that 
they could no longer be endured in silence. This had been espe- 
cially the case since Bartolomé Antonio Sans y Mufioz had been 
inquisitor, whose methods can be appreciated by a single example. 
Captain-general Marquis of Gastafiara, had imprisoned a French- 
man named Jaime Balle, on a matter of state, Spain being at the 
time at war with France, with strict orders to keep him inco- 
municado. Mutfioz suddenly demanded an opportunity of taking 
testimony of him. Gastafiara was absent and no one had author- 
ity to violate his instructions, but the regent of the royal chan- 
cery and the gaoler offered, if Mufioz would declare it to be a 
matter of faith, to endeavor to find some means of compliance. 
This assurance he refused to give, even verbally, and he threat- 
ened the regent with excommunication. The Audiencia invited 
him to a conference, which he refused and it then cited him 
before the Banch Reyal, with the customary warning of banish- 
ment and seizure of temporalities. Mufioz responded, December 
29th, with a mandate to the regent ordering him, under pain of 
excommunication, to allow the deposition of the prisoner to be 
taken and he followed this, within an hour, with an excommuni- 
cation published in all the pulpits and affixed to all the church- 
doors. The next day this was re-aggravated and the regent was 
publicly cursed with the awful anathema formulated for hard- 
ened and impenitent sinners. The Audiencia rejoined with the 
decree of banishment and seizure of temporalities, under the 
customary term of fifteen days. The tribunal answered this with 
a threat of interdict on the city; it convoked all the superiors of 
the religious Orders and arranged with the clergy for a great 
procession when it should take its departure. It kept its doors 
closed and even refused to receive the messengers of Gastafiara, 
who had hastened back to Barcelona, but he delayed further 
action until he should communicate with Madrid and receive the 
royal orders. When they came, on January 11, 1696, he was at 
Montealegre, a couple of leagues from the city; they were sent to 
him by a special courier and he returned the next morning and 


* Archivo gén. de laC. de Aragon, Leg. 528. (The alguazil mayor was usually 
a man of rank.) 


Cuap. IV] CATALONIA 483 


made secret arrangements for their execution. At 2 p.m. he sent 
word to Mufioz that he wished to see him on the king’s service. 
At 4.30 p.m. Mufioz came, bringing the fiscal with him. A scriv- 
ener was introduced who read to him the king’s order, which he 
said he was ready to obey. Gastafiara told him that he must 
start at once; a coach was at the door to which he was escorted 
with all honor; lackeys with flambeaux were ready and a guard 
of twenty-five musketeers. Gastafiara gave him money and he 
was provided with all comforts, even to a courteous gentleman 
as a companion to enforce all proper respect for him. As he was 
leaving the palace, his violent temper burst forth in regrets that 
he had not been allowed time to cast the interdict on the city. 
He was driven to the embarcadero, placed on board a vessel that 
had been made ready and was conveyed to the nearest Valencian 
port. It is symptomatic of Spanish conditions that in war-time 
the captain-general was obliged to abandon all other duties and 
devote a day to kidnapping a troublesome priest, and this is 
emphasized by the fact that the inquisitor-general rewarded the 
conduct of Mufioz by appointing him to one of the most desirable 
tribunals of Spain.’ Possibly this affair may have influenced 
Carlos II in reissuing, in 1696, his father’s injunction of 1661 to 
observe the Concordias exactly and to be more sparing of excom- 
munications.’ 

Philip V was scarce seated on the throne when he found him- 
self confronted with the eternal question of Catalan hostility 
towards the tribunal. A consulta of the Suprema, October 16, 
1701, warns him that the inquisitors of Barcelona report that, in 
the Cértes about to assemble, efforts will be made to limit its 
usefulness ‘and he is exhorted to follow the example of his 
predecessors.* Whatever was done was of little consequence for, 
in the war which broke out soon afterwards, Catalonia enthu- 
siastically acknowledged the Archduke Charles as Carlos III and 
became the stronghold of the Austrian party. The situation of 
the rebellion of 1640-52 was duplicated. The tribunal was with- 
drawn, but seems to have been replaced by a local organization, 
for an article of the Cortes of 1706, duly approved by the Aus- 


1 Archivo gén. dela C. de Aragon, Leg. 708.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, 
Libro 66, fol. 179, 189, 228, 252, 283.—Bofarull y Broca, Hist. de Catalufia, 
VIII, 385. 

2 MSS. of Library of Univ. of Halle, Yc, 17. 

$ Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 66, fol. 460 


484 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


trian Carlos, regulating the insaculacion for public office, recog- 
nizes its certificates respecting its officials... Of course it could 
exercise no jurisdiction over the heretic English allies; it has left 
no traces of its activity and was replaced by a revival of the epis- 
copal cognizance of heresy. As to places beyond the control of the 
Austrian party, a provision of the Suprema, March 16, 1706, 
extended the jurisdiction of the Saragossa tribunal over all that 
should be recovered from the enemy until such time as the 
Inquisition of Barcelona should be re-established.” The desperate 
resistance of the Catalans postponed this until 1715, and when 
the tribunal was reinstated it found in the secret prison two cap- 
tives, Juan Castillo a bigamist and Mariana Costa accused of 
sorcery, both of them confined by order of the vicar-general of 
the diocese.* As all the liberties and privileges of Catalonia were 
abolished by the conquerors, its subsequent relations with the 
Inquisition offer no special characteristics. 


Majorea had no Concordia and its tribunal was free to claim 
what extent of jurisdiction it saw fit, limited only by the resist- 
ance of the civil authorities, which, as we have seen, was energet- 
ically expressed at an early period. As defined by Portocarrero, 
in 1623, in practice it asserted complete jurisdiction, active and 
passive, in civil and criminal cases, over its salaried and com- 
missioned officials and their families; over familiars, in criminal 
matters, active and passive; in civil, passive only, with exclusion 
of their families. The occasion of his book was a violent struggle 
between the viceroy and the tribunal, which presents the ordinary 
features of these contests for supremacy between rival depart- 
ments of the government. In a search for arms in the house of 
Juan Zufiez, receiver of confiscations, some were found. The 
viceroy at once arrested him, sentenced him to leave the island 
within twenty-four hours and shipped him away. The inquis- 
itor promptly excommunicated the viceroy; the royal fiscal 
appealed; the viceroy and royal judges summoned the inquisitor 
to a conference preparatory to a competencia or to appear in the 
Banch Reyal and defend his proceedings. On his refusal the 
Banch Reyal pronounced sentence of banishment and seizure 


1 Capitols de Cort en lo any 1706, cap. 34 (Barcelona, 1706, p. 70). 

? Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Seccion Varios, Leg. 390. 

§ Tbid., Legajo 13.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Sala 39, Leg. 4, fol. 23. 
* Portocarrero, 33 21, 22. 


Cuap. IV] MAJORCA—CASTILE |. 485 


of temporalities, which was published with sound of drum and 
trumpet. They also issued an edict declaring the censures null 
and void and ordering the clergy to disregard them; they refused 
to consider themselves excommunicated, they attended mass and 
apparently had the support of the people and clergy, for no atten- 
tion was paid to the interdict cast on the city by the inquisitor.’ 
What was the final result does not appear, nor does it much 
matter; the significance in these affairs is the spectacle presented 
to the people of lawless collisions between the representatives 
and exponents of the law. 

In Majorca the most impressive cases of this kind occurred 
between the Inquisition and the ecclesiastical courts and will be 
considered hereafter. It suffices here to say that broils with the 
secular authorities were constant and contributed their share 
to occupy and distract the attention of the central government. 
It would be superfluous to enumerate those of which the details 
have chanced to reach us; they would merely prove that, consid- 
ering their small size and scanty population, the Balearic Isles 
were not behind their continental sisters of Aragon in adding to 
the perplexities of the monarchy. 


This somewhat prolonged recital of the struggles of the king- 
doms of the Crown of Aragon gives an opportunity of realizing 
the stubborn resistance, to the arrogant pretensions of the Inqui- 
sition, of provinces which still retained institutions through which 
public opinion could assert itself. The people of the kingdoms 
of Castile had been reduced to submission under the absolutism 
of the House of Austria and, though they might at times com- 
plain, they could make no effective efforts to ameliorate their 
position. When, in 1579 and again in 1583, the Cértes of Castile 
complained of the arrest and immurement in the secret prisons 
of individuals in every quarrel with an official of the Inquisition, 
to the permanent disgrace of families, Philip II merely replied 
that he would make inquiry and take such action as was fitting,’ 
The only resource was to raise contests in individual cases and 
these were frequent enough and violent enough to prove that 
there was the same spirit of opposition to inquisitorial encroach- 
ment and the same pervading discontent with the abuses flour- 
ishing so rankly under inquisitorial protection. Instances of this 


1 Portocarrero 22 51, 54, 58, 60, 61, 65, 96, 97. 
? Lafuente, Hist. gén. de Espafia, XIV, 417, 432. 


486 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


could be cited almost without limit, but one or two will suffice 
as examples of the multiform aspect of these quarrels and the 
temper in which they were fought over. It should be borne in 
mind that, in these struggles asin those of Aragon, there was no 
question of freedom of conscience and no desire to limit the 
effectiveness of the Holy Office as the guardian of purity of faith. 
The Castilian, like the Catalan, looked with exultation on the 
triumph over heresy in the autos de fe, and he desired only to set 
bounds to the intrusion of the Inquisition on the field of secular 
justice. 

The chancellery of Granada was the supreme tribunal of New 
Castile as that of Valladolid was of Old Castile. The alcaldes of 
its Sala del Crimen constituted the highest criminal court, from 
which there was no appeal save to God. April 15, 1623, the 
alcalde mayor, after five days’ trial, condemned Gerdnimo Palo- 
mino, an habitual criminal and rufian, to two hundred lashes 
and six years of galleys for various offences, including sundry 
blasphemies; on the 24th, the Sala confirmed the sentence and 
ordered its execution. On the same day the Inquisition served 
two notices on the alcalde mayor prohibiting his cognizance of 
the case, as some of the alleged crimes concerned the faith, over 
which it had exclusive jurisdiction, and it demanded the sur- 
render of the accused and of all the papers under the customary 
comminations. The alcalde mayor responded by calling for a 
competencia and offering to deliver Palomino for trial on any 
charges of heresy, if record were made that he was already a 
galley-slave to be returned to the royal prison. The next day 
the tribunal sent to the prison and claimed him, on the pretext 
that the case had been transferred to it, whereupon the alcaide 
of the prison surrendered him without orders from the judges. 
When the latter heard of this they also learned that the transfer 
had been effected through the efforts of the prisoner’s friends 
and liberal bribery of the officials of the tribunal, who had been 
active in getting him out of prison. After satisfying themselves 
of this by investigation, they ordered the arrest of four laymen 
—a notary, a messenger and two familiars—and they further 
imprisoned in their houses the alecalde mayor and alcaide of the 
prison for acting without informing the Sala. The tribunal con- 
cluded Palomino’s trial within forty-eight hours, sentencing him 
to hear a mass in the audience chamber, and it appears that it 
returned him. It further commenced proceedings against the 


Cuar. IV] CASTILE 487 


alealdes, summoning them to liberate the officials within three 
hours under pain of excommunication. The alcaldes protested 
against this and demanded a competencia, as provided under 
the Concordia, but the next day they were excommunicated in 
all the churches and this was followed by an interdict laid on the 
city. This forced a compromise by which the prisoners were 
liberated, subject to rearrest in case the competencia should 
result in justifying the alcaldes, and the latter were absolved from 
the censures. The matter seemed to be settled, but all parties 
had counted without the impetuous and aggressive Inquisitor- 
general Pacheco. Without awaiting further information, and in 
disregard of the laws prescribing peaceful settlement by com- 
petencias, he had evoked the case to himself and acted upon it 
off-hand. ‘Two days after the absolution, the inquisitors reim- 
posed the excommunication by his command, and notices were 
served on the alcaldes and their alguazil mayor to appear before 
him within fifteen days to stand trial. Against this they pro- 
tested and, on their failure to appear, they were not only excom- 
municated afresh but anathematized in all the churches. The 
scandal had thus assumed national proportions.’ 

The alcaldes were the direct and highest judicial representa- 
tives of the king, but such was Philip’s subservience to the 
Inquisition that he would not permit a competencia following 
the regular course but took the affair into his own hands. The 
President of the Council of Castile, in remitting to the royal favor- 
ite Olivares, July 4, 1623, a memorial from the Council, declared 
that the condition to which the chancellery of Granada was 
reduced, owing to the methods of the Inquisition, was the most 
ignominious that had ever been heard of in Spain, especially 
considering how slight was the cause of all this disquiet, for, 
when everything was settled it was again enkindled at the man- 
date of the inquisitor-general. As the matter was in the king’s 
hands, the Council could do nothing but appeal to his majesty, 
with all the disadvantages under which it labored in combating the 
inquisitor-general; had its hands been free it might already have 
conquered, to the benefit of the royal jurisdiction and service of the 
king, for every day brought greater disturbance to the Republic.’ 


1 This account it derived from the printed argument of the alcaldes, a very 
temperate and manly document, of which a copy is in the Bodleian Library, 
Arch. S, 130. . 

? Archivo de Simancas, Gracia y Justicia, Leg. 621, fol. 5. 


488 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


In spite of this appeal, Philip decided in favor of the Inquisi- 
tion and the humiliation of the chancellery was complete. Yet 
Pacheco was not satisfied with victory and proceeded to trample 
on the vanquished. In the course of the quarrel, Gudiel de 
Peralta, one of the judges, and Matias Gonzdlez de Septlveda, 
the fiscal of the court, had drawn up legal arguments in its justi- 
fication. These Pacheco submitted to his censors, who of course 
discovered latent heresies lurking in them, whereupon he ordered 
them to be suppressed as heretical and announced his intention 
of proceeding rigorously against the authors. The Council, on 
October 7th, again appealed to Philip. The accused, it said, had 
only defended the royal jurisdiction in a perfectly legitimate 
manner; the inquisitor-general should not have attacked royal 
officials and inflicted irreparable injury on them and their pos- 
terity by denouncing them as heretics, without consulting the 
king. He was begged to intervene and order Pacheco to suspend 
proceedings, while a junta of the two Councils should consider 
the papers and decide what course should be taken.’ It is 
probable that in some such way this indefensible attempt was 
suppressed, for neither of the inculpated names appear in the 
Expurgatory Index of Zapata, in 1632. 

It would seem difficult to set bounds to the power of an organ- 
ization which could thus arbitrarily employ the censures of the 
Church on any department of the government, without being 
subject to control save to that of a king docile to its exigencies. 
Yet the Suprema, which always sustained the tribunals in their 
wanton excesses, adopted their quarrels and fought them unspar- 
ingly to the end, was thoroughly conscious of their wrong-doing. 
While this conflict was in progress, it issued a carta acordada, 
April 23d, earnestly exhorting the tribunals to maintain friendly 
relations with the royal officials and not to waste time in dissen- 
sions to the neglect of their duties in matters of faith; com- 
petencias were always to be admitted and no censures were to 
be employed without consulting the Suprema, unless delay was 
inadmissible.” 

How nugatory were these counsels of moderation, under the 
dominance of such a man as Pacheco, was soon afterwards mani- 
fested in a still more scandalous outbreak in Seville, under his 
direction, in 1625. The assistente or governor, Fernando Ramirez 


+ Archivo de Simancas, Gracia y Justicia, Leg. 621, fol. 45, 47. 
, ? MSS. of Royal Library of Copenhagen, 218, p. 349. 


Crap. IV] CASTILE 489 


Farifias, himself a member of the Council of Castile and a man of 
high consideration, was excommunicated and thus prevented from 
concluding a negotiation for a donation to the king of eighty 
thousand ducats; his alguazil, an honorable man, was wounded 
and was shut up in prison to keep him out of the hands of the 
tribunal, which declared that he was wanted on a matter of faith, 
thus covering him and his family with infamy. The king and 
Olivares were besieged by Pacheco on the one hand and the 
Council of Castile on the other. The king, as usual, sided with 
the Inquisition and the President of the Council tendered his 
resignation with the suggestion that his office had better be given 
to Pacheco who, by holding both positions, could cover up these 
scandals, while the royal jurisdiction could scarce be reduced to 
ereater degradation. It is no wonder that Olivares, in a letter to 
the president, declared himself to be the most unfortunate of 
men, for he could satisfy nobody; his best course would be to ask 
the king to let him abandon the management of affairs; when the 
kingdom was in such straits that he could scarce take time to 
breathe in devising remedies, his efforts were wasted in com- 
petencias and he concluded with the despairing declaration that he 
lost his senses in thinking over it without knowing what to say." 

The statesmen who were guiding the destinies of Spain in 
those perilous times might well groan under the superfluous burden 
of deciding these contests over trifles so ferociously waged, but 
they were not to be spared. Arce y Reynoso was not so violent 
as Pacheco but he was equally obstinate and was determined to 
emancipate the Inquisition wholly by relieving it from royal 
supervision. There was an instructive case at Cuenca, in 1645, 
where the corregidor, Don Alonso Mufioz de Castilblanque sent 
a band of assassins to murder a woman with whom he had illicit 
relations, together with a priest named Jacinto. The crime 
created great excitement, but Mufioz was a contador, or account- 
ant of the tribunal, and as such a titular official. He presented 
himself before the inquisitors who assumed his case and promptly 
excommunicated the judge who attempted to prosecute him. 
Philip had the matter investigated and was told that both the 
woman and the priest had been killed. He sent to the Suprema 
a decree ordering the removal of the excommunication and the 
delivery of the criminal to the Council of Castile, to be tried by 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Gracia y Justicia, Leg. 621, fol. 30-45. 


490 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


the judge which it had appointed, for the inquisitors could not 
properly punish so atrocious a crime without incurring irregu- 
larity. This was clear and peremptory enough, but, in place of 
obeying it, Arce y Reynoso replied, May 4, 1645, that this would 
be a great and unheard of violation of the rights of the Holy 
Office. The woman was not dead but was in Valencia, where the 
tribunal was busily collecting evidence; to hand Mufioz over to 
the secular judges for trial and execution would incur the same 
irregularity as sentencing him; the case would be tried by the 
Suprema, which had a wide range of suitable penalties that did 
not infer irregularity; meanwhile Mufioz would be safely guarded 
and he trusted that the king would not set so pernicious an 
example. 

When Philip rejected this appeal and repeated his order, a 
learned and elaborate argument was prepared to show that he 
had no power to interfere. It took the ground, to which we have 
already referred, that the temporal jurisdiction of the Inquisition 
over its officials was a grant from the papacy; it was exclusive 
and unlimited and no secular ruler could deprive the Holy Office 
of it; the pope had power to make this grant and the king had 
none to remove this or any other case from its cognizance, for 
he was not supreme over the ecclesiastical and papal jurisdiction 
—the truth being that the papal commissions to the inquisitor- 
general conferred power to remove and punish subordinates but 
said nothing as to its being exclusive, and equally fallacious was 
the citation of three authorities whose utterances had no bearing 
on the question at issue. This audacious reliance on the igno- 
rance of Philip and his secular advisers was successful. Philip 
made one or two efforts more, but Arce y Reynoso held good. 
A memorial, in 1648, on the general subject, from a member of 
the Council of Castile, tells the king that his repeated commands 
in the case of Mufioz had been disobeyed and that, although the 
criminal had so long been in the hands of the inquisitors, he had 
not yet been sentenced, which he held to be clear proof that their 
aim was to defend their officials from the royal justice and not 
to punish them.’ 

1 The three passages cited were Simancas, de Cathol. Institt. Tit. xxxiv, n. 6: 
Sousa, Aphorismi Inquisit. Lib. 1, cap. 1, n. 16, and Pefia in Eymerici Directo- 
rium, P. III, Comment. 61. Of the three Sousa comes nearest to supplying what 
was wanted in saying that the officials of the Inquisition are punishable, for 


official delinquencies, by those who appoint them. 
* Bibl. nacional, MSS., X, 157, fol. 244; D, 118, fol. 151, 188. 


Cuap. IV] CASTILE 491 


How liberal was the construction placed on this term of titular 
official was illustrated when, in 1622, at Toledo, the corregidor 
arrested the butcher of the tribunal for intolerable frauds on the 
public. The inquisitor demanded the prisoner and the papers, 
published the corregidor in all the churches as excommunicate, 
seized the alguazil and apparitor who had made the arrest, cast 
them into the secret prison, tried them as if for heresy, shaved 
their heads and beards and banished them and refused to their 
families any evidence that would preserve their posterity from 
infamy. There was danger of a rising in Toledo against the 
Inquisition, but it was averted; the Council of Castile protested 
and a junta was held which adopted measures to prevent a repe- 
tition of such outrages but, as usual, no attention was paid to 
them. ? 

It would be superfluous to multiply examples of the perennial 
struggle which was distracting the energies of the government 
and weakening the respect for law in every quarter of Spain. 
Kach tribunal contributed its share, and there was an unending 
stream of cases pouring into Madrid for settlement. Each side 
blamed the other for this anomalous condition. In 1632, the 
Suprema, in defending the tribunal of Valencia for its protec- 
tion of criminal familiars, bitterly complained that the object 
of the Concordias was the relief of the tribunals, the punishment 
of offenders, the quick despatch of cases, and the diminished 
oppressien of pleaders, but that this had been converted into 
perpetual strife, regardless of forms and rules of procedure.” For 
this it was itself primarily to blame, for though there were doubt- 
less faults on both sides, the cases recorded in the reports and 
the arguments of the Inquisition show that it was the chief 
offender. Its aggressive powers were too much greater than those 
of its adversaries, and its methods were too sharp, for the secular 
authorities often to risk the consequences of being in the wrong. 


There was another direction in which the Holy Office sought 
to interfere with the administration of justice. So complete is 
the independence of secular authority claimed by the Church for 
those in holy orders, that a licence from a bishop is held to be 
necessary before a cleric can obey a summons to appear as a wit- 


> Consulta Magna (Bibl. nacional, MSS., Q, 4). 
Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 20, fol. 138. 


492 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


‘ness in a lay court, even in civil cases. The Inquisition included 
this among the exemptions of all connected with it, whether lay 
or clerical, and even extended it to familiars. The privilege seems 
generally to have been conceded, as respects the salaried officials 
but, as applied to familiars, it was too grotesque not to excite 
opposition. The Concordia of 1568, as we have seen, provided 
that familiars should testify before secular judges without requir- 
ing licence from inquisitors and that the latter should not pro- 
hibit them from so doing, which infers that it was an abuse 
requiring correction and also that officials were conceded to enjoy 
the exemption. The power to summon a witness necessarily 
includes that of coercing him. to testify, and this was exercised 
by imprisoning recalcitrants, which came to be regarded as an 
infraction of privilege. In 1649, in the case of Claudio Bolano, 
a familiar imprisoned for refusing to give evidence, the tribunal 
of Valencia forined a competencia, pending which he was released 
under bail to both jurisdictions. The question was of difficult 
solution and the competencia dragged on for ten years without 
settlement. Then, in 1659, the same thing occurred and another 
competencia was formed, in which the most that the Inquisition 
would concede was that, when the evidence was indispensable, a 
notary should be sent to the familiar’s house to take it in secret, 
basing this upon the danger to which witnesses were exposed in 
the violent factions of the time.” The question, however, was 
settled, in 1699, in the case of Felipe Bru. At Jdtiva, on August 
‘14, 1698, Don Luis Salzedo, Lord of Pamis, was shot and killed 
when standing at a window of his house. Don Vicente Monserrat, 
judge of the Audiencia of Valencia, found Bru, who was a familiar, 
a contumacious witness. He was first given the town as a prison, 
then his house, and finally was confined in chains. He appealed 
to the tribunal, which ordered his release within three days, under 
pain of excommunication and five hundred ducats. A com- 
petencia was formed which, in November, 1699, was decided in 
favor of the royal jurisdiction. It was probably in consequence 
of this discussion that, on July 15th, a royal decree was issued 
compelling familiars to give evidence in secular courts. Even 
this did not abate the pretensions of the Inquisition for when, 
in 1702, Joseph Pérez of Montesa, a familiar, was ordered, under 
penalty of a thousand ducats, not to leave that town because a 


? Ricci, Synopsis Decretorum S. Congr. Immunitatis s. v. Testis, n. 1. 
? Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 1, n. 1, fol. 157. 


Cuap. IV] THE SPIRITUAL COURTS 493 


deposition was wanted from him, he appealed to the tribunal of 
Valencia which, with the usual threats, commanded the revoca- 
tion of the order. On this being refused, Pérez went to Valencia 
and had himself incarcerated in the secret prison, where he was 
inaccessible. The Audiencia pursued the matter, there was con- 
siderable correspondence and preparations for a competencia, 
but finally the affair was settled by sending Pérez to the house 
of the regent of the Audiencia, where he made his deposition. 
To the end, however, the tribunal maintained the position that, 
if any constraint was used, it would resist and protect the familiar 
unless a competencia decided to the contrary.’ 


It was not the secular courts alone that had these perpetual 
conflicts with the Inquisition. Like Ishmael, its hand was against 
every man and every man’s hand was against it—but, in fact, this 
was to a great extent the case between all the different jurisdic- 
tions among which the various classes of society were parcelled 
out by their several privileges and exemptions. Next to the 
royal courts ranked the spiritual courts in the number and com- 
plexity of debatable questions with the Inquisition. With these 
there were two sources of contention, for they not only claimed 
by prescriptive right exclusive jurisdiction in all temporal matters 
over all who wore the tonsure, but there was a broad field for 
discussion in the somewhat hazy delimitation of spiritual offences 
justiciable by one or the other. This latter subject will engage 
our attention hereafter; at present we are concerned only with 
the questions arising from the personnel of the Holy Office. Noto- 
riously lax as were the episcopal courts with offenders of the cloth, 
the Inquisition had the reputation of still greater indulgence 
with those who were under its protection; clerics who were also 
officials therefore preferred its tribunals, giving rise to frequent 
quarrels in which the inquisitors treated their clerical opponents 
as remorselessly as they did the secular officials and judges. The 
episcopal Ordinaries, provisors and vicars-general contended that 
they had, except in cases of faith, exclusive jurisdiction over all 
clerics; that the temporal jurisdiction of the Inquisition was a 
royal grant which could not supersede the canon law and that 
the papal commissions only gave faculties for punishing official 
malfeasance. To this unanswerable argument the inquisitors 


1 Tbidem, Leg. 1, n. 3, fol. 3, 11, 25. 


494 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


paid little heed and the prelates were worse off than the judges, 
for these at least had the Councils of Castile or Aragon to struggle 
for them, but the Councils admitted that they had no standing 
in ecclesiastical quarrels. The natural recourse of the prelates 
for protection was to Rome, but this was a subject of intense 
jealousy, traditional in the Spanish monarchy, and Philip III, in 
a cédula of January 21, 1611, addressed to all the prelates of his 
dominions, told them that they must appeal only to the Suprema 
and forbade them to carry any case to the Holy See.’ 

There could thus be no competencia; the conflicts between 
the two jurisdictions were one-sided and were conducted by the 
tribunals with the same overbearing arrogance as that displayed 
towards secular magistrates. The first summons on the provisor 
or vicar-general inhibited him, under pain of excommunication 
and a heavy fine, from further action, ordering him, within 
twenty-four hours, to remit the case to the Inquisition and to 
discharge the prisoner under bail to present himself before the 
tribunal, while the notary was required to surrender all the 
papers. If this was not obeyed, it was followed by another, com- 
manding obedience within six hours, in default of which all 
beneficed priests were required, under similar penalties, to pub- 
lish the provisor and notary as excommunicates and to place 
their names on the lists as such. A circular letter was also 
addressed to all priests, chaplains and sacristans of the district, 
to admonish all persons, within six hours and under pain of 
excommunication, to avoid. the provisor and notary, to make 
no pleadings before them, to hold no communication with them 
and not to furnish them with bread or wine, fish or flesh, while 
a public edict to the same effect was issued to all the people. In 
case of continued obduracy, these measures were promptly fol- 
lowed by an edict to all the clergy, ordering them to anathematize 
the provisor and notary with tolling bells and extinguished 
candles, proclaiming them accursed of God and his saints— 
‘accursed be the bread that they eat and the bed on which they 
sleep and the beasts on which they ride, and may their souls 
perish in hell like the candles in the water: let them be compre- 
hended in the sentence of Sodom and Gomorrha and of Dathan 
and Abiram, whom the earth swallowed for disobedience, and 
may all the curses of Psalm Deus laudem meam (Ps. cCvItl, a 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 13, fol. 145. 


Cuap. IV] THE SPIRITUAL COURTS 495 


fearful commination) light on them!” If this did not suffice 
within twenty-four hours, an interdict followed, tolling bells and 
performing divine service in low tone with locked doors, until 
otherwise ordered. In case this failed, the last step was a cessatio 
a divinis, or cessation of church services in the city where the 
offenders lived, in order to coerce them with popular clamor.' 
It was difficult for either lay or clerical officials to contend with 
opponents who wielded such weapons as these. 

The irresponsible exercise of such powers inevitably led to 
their abuse. In the Concordia of 1568 it is highly suggestive to 
find a clause forbidding inquisitors to issue, as they have been 
accustomed, to familiars and officials, general inhibitions pro- 
tecting them from the ecclesiastical courts; such inhibitions are 
to be special and issued only in each case as it may occur. Equally 
significant is another which says that in no case belonging by 
law to the provisor shall the inquisitor intervene against his will. 
The strained relations resulting between the ecclesiastical body 
and the Holy Office are alluded to in the project of reform, pre- 
sented to the Suprema in 1623, which says that the clerical com- 
missioners and their notaries bring about many conflicts with 
the ecclesiastical judges and, as there are no Concordias, the 
inquisitors are wont to arrogate to themselves greater jurisdic- 
tion than belongs to them, which causes much murmuring and 
resentment.of the prelates and clergy. The writer piously wishes 
that this could be avoided, but he evidently has no remedy to 
propose.* 

A conflict caused by one of these local notaries in 1609 amply 
justified the murmurs of the prelates. The priest of Cabra, who 
occupied the almost nominal position of local notary, was a 
notorious incestuous concubinarian, who had not for eight years 
celebrated mass or recited prayers. The provisor of Cérdova 
commenced a prosecution and threw him into the episcopal gaol, 
when he claimed the fuero of the Inquisition. The provisor had 
been on friendly terms with the three inquisitors and sought an 
amicable settlement of the matter when, by a trick, they obtained 
possession of the papers and inhibited him from further proceed- 
ings. He appealed to the Suprema and was excommunicated. 


1 Modo de Proceder, fol. 27-9 (Bibl. nacional, MSS., D, 122). The date of this 
is 1645. 

2 Actos de Corte del Reyno de Aragon, fol. 96 (Zaragoza, 1664). 

3 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 926, fol. 27. 


496 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


Four times the Suprema ordered the inquisitors to abandon the 
case and remove the censure, but they persistently disobeyed. 
All the officials of the episcopal court were ordered to hold no 
communication with him, which threw the whole business of the 
diocese into confusion, for the bishop was absent and the provisor 
was his representative. The culprit escaped from the episcopal 
gaol and was harbored by the tribunal. Passion was becoming 
acute; a band of familiars and officials broke into the episcopal 
palace and endeavored to carry off the provisor, but he was 
rescued by the canons in a dilapidated condition and took to his 
bed. Then the inquisitors pronounced the magic word—a matter 
of faith—which brought to their aid the corregidor and municipal 
authorities, who came with a troop of soldiers and carried him 
off on his bed, to the sound of drums and trumpets. He was 
taken to the Inquisition and confined for two months in a small 
cell, tried without opportunity for defence and sentenced to 
forfeit his office of provisor, to four years of banishment and 
other penalties, and copies of the sentence were circulated through- 
out the city. The bishop had sought to come to his rescue by 
excommunicating the inquisitors; they disregarded the censures, 
threatened to prosecute him if he did not remove them and did 
prosecute some of the canons as conspiring against the Inqui- 
sition, because they had been elected by the chapter to aid the 
bishop in defending the provisor.’ 

Such a sentence against a church dignitary of high rank 
required confirmation by the Suprema, which must have been 
given, for appeal was made to Philip IIJ. He rendered some 
satisfaction by dismissing and banishing all secular officials who 
had been concerned in the arrest and wounding of the provisor, 
but the inquisitors, whose mere tools they had been, were left 
undisturbed.” Yet it was impossible that an affair which had 
aroused the attention of all Spain should pass without an attempt 
to prevent the recurrence of such scandals. There had been a 
threat, and possibly more than a threat, to appeal to Rome in 
defence of the bishop and clergy of Cérdova, which led to the 
cédula of January 21, 1611, alluded to above, restricting their 
recourse to the Suprema. In urging this the Suprema, in a con- 
sulta of November 15, 1610, admitted that these troubles arose 


1 These details are furnished by a memorial to the king, a copy of which is in 
the Bodleian Library, Arch. 5S, 130. 
2 Bravo, Catdlogo de los ete: de Cérdova, p. 580. 


Cuap. IV] THE SPIRITUAL COURTS 497 


from the aggressions of the tribunals and their unnecessary 
multiplication of nominal officials; it had recently issued three 
cartas acordadas on the subject and had written to all the bishops 
asking reports of such excesses so as to remedy them. Philip in 
reply authorized the Suprema to draft such a cédula as it desired 
but ordered it to be so framed as not to encourage the inquisitors, 
who were every day intervening in matters beyond their com- 
petence for the purpose of extending their jurisdiction; it was 
this that gave rise to these troubles, nor would they cease till the 
cause was removed.’ 

Thus it was admitted on all hands that the fault lay with the 
tribunals, yet the wrong committed by that of Cérdova remained 
unredressed and unpunished. Philip permitted himself, in spite 
of his better judgement, to be persuaded to cut off all recourse to 
the court of last resort in Rome, and some nominal relief must 
be offered to the oppressed churches and prelates. The memorial 
from Cordova had concluded with a prayer for some law to 
prevent these discords and to maintain the episcopal jurisdiction 
over the clergy, as the king had promised in a letter transmitted 
through the Council of Castile. The promise was kept after a 
fashion, though not until after a delay which shows how pro- 
longed was the resistance encountered. In a carta acordada of 
November 28, 1612, the tribunals were informed that in order 
that the ministers of the Inquisition may not sin through con- 
fidence of impunity, and to prevent the conflicts which disturb 
the peace, the Suprema has resolved that in the cases of un- 
salaried clerical officials, the episcopal ordinaries shall have 
exclusive jurisdiction over offences relating to clerical duties and 
offices, to simony and spiritual matters, while inquisitors shall 
have cumulative jurisdiction with the ordinaries, depending on 
priority of action, in public and scandalous offences, such as 
incontinence, usury, gambling and the like.2 This remained in 
force nominally at least, until the last, but the allusion to the 
perpetual troubles arising from this source, in the project pre- 
sented to the Suprema in 1623, shows how futile it was in curbing 
the aggressions of the tribunals. 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 29, fol. 177; Lib. 30, fol. 1 (see Appen- 
dix). ; 
2 Ibidem, Lib. 30, fol. 108.—MSS. of Royal Library of Copenhagen, 218b, 
p. 348. 
32 


498 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


Throughout Peninsular Spain the episcopal jurisdiction was 
thus left defenceless to the encroachments of the Inquisition, 
but the Church of Majorca was fortunate in obtaining the pro- 
tection of Rome, leading to a series of conflicts, waged on less 
unequal terms, which are worth consideration as revealing a 
peculiar phase in these affairs. There was a long-standing quarrel 
between the cathedral canons and the Inquisition. In’ 1600, 
one of the former, Pere Ensefiat, assisted in the escape of a man 
who had wounded a familiar, whereupon the inquisitor, Francisco 
de Esquinel, threw him in prison and made him give bail in three 
hundred ducats. In 1605, another canon, Francisco Sanceloni, 
had a verbal altercation with Bernardo Luis Cotoner, advocate 
of prisoners, for which Esquinel imprisoned him, tried him and 
condemned him in the costs, with his past incarceration as a 
punishment. The indignant canons addressed a strong remon- 
strance to the Suprema. They had an old privilege, confirmed 
by the Council of Trent (Sess. xxv, De Reform. cap. 6) that they 
could be arrested only by the Ordinary sitting in judgement with 
two of their number; in matters of faith they admitted subjection 
to the Holy Office, but they claimed exemption in civil and 
criminal cases. The number of familiars and officials, and their 
petulance arising from the protection of the tribunal, rendered 
it impossible to be always incurring the expense and dangers of 
appeals to Rome for the preservation of their privileges. This 
was ineffective and, in the course of another outbreak in 1630, 
there was a correspondence between the Congregation of the 
Roman Inquisition and the nuncio at Madrid respecting an 
appeal from the canons. In this the nuncio reported that he 
had applied to Inquisitor-general Zapata, who promised to 
instruct the inquisitor not to molest the canons.’ 

If he did so, he was disobeyed as usual and, in 1636, a canon 
named Domenge was involved in a civil suit before the tribunal, 
resulting in a judgement against him of five thousand reales, the 
execution of which he resisted by force. This brought on him a 
prosecution, in spite of protests interjected by the bishop and 
chapter, which was carried on appeal to the Suprema, where he 
was condemned in seven hundred reales which he paid. Mean- 
while, notwithstanding the cédula of 1611, the bishop and chapter 
had applied to Rome for a brief declaring that the canons were 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 52, fol. 34. 


Cuap. IV] THE SPIRITUAL COURTS 499 


subject to the Inquisition only in matters of faith. The question 
was exhaustively discussed, in the Congregation of the Holy 
Office, with Luis de los Infantes, the Roman agent of the Inqui- 
sition. The conclusion reached was that the Majorca tribunal 
had no jurisdiction over the canons save in matters of faith and 
this was duly embodied in the brief Cum sicut dilecti, March 31, 
1642, which is preserved in the Bullarium. It names the bishop 
and dean or treasurer as executors, with power to inflict censures 
and to invoke if necessary the aid of the secular arm. It was 
received in Majorca with general rejoicing; it was printed and 
circulated and a syndicate was formed by the clergy to obtain, 
without regard to expense, a similar one for the whole ecclesi- 
astical body, an effort which was successful in the following 
September. 

The brief was duly served on the inquisitor, who refused to 
recognize it as not having been transmitted through the Suprema; 
besides he asserted that it was surreptitious and obreptitious as 
having been granted without a hearing of the other side and 
moreover it was in derogation of the bull Sz de protegendis. In 
a consulta of December 11th, the Suprema represented energeti- 
cally to Philip IV the manner in which his predecessors had 
compelled the surrender of papal letters adverse to the Inquisi- 
tion; it asked him to have the present one suppressed and to 
instruct the prelates that all cases of difference must be referred 
to it, that norecourse be had to Rome, under the penalties deereed 
by Ferdinand, that the Viceroy of Majorca be required to compel 
the chapter to desist and that the ambassador to Rome be 
instructed to obtain the revocation of the obnoxious letters. 

Unluckily for the Suprema the times were unpropitious. 
Majorca was too near to rebellious Catalonia for the imperious 
methods of the Holy Office to be judicious. Philip replied that 
the revival of Ferdinand’s laws would cause trouble and the 
remedy sought must be practicable. The inquisitor of Majorca 
had been guilty of gross excesses and must be ordered to exercise 
moderation, and he suggested a junta of members of the Suprema 
and Council of Aragon to devise a Concordia. Whether such 
compromise was reached does not appear; if it was, subsequent 
events show that it was not observed by either side and no 
reference to it occurs. The papal briefs were maintained and ten 
years later, after the collapse of the Catalan rebellion, instruc- 
tions of April 23, 1652, to an ambassador departing for Rome, 


500 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


order him to labor for their revocation; their evil example was 
contagious; the Knights of St. John in Majorca were seeking 
to obtain a similar favor through the Maltese ambassador, 
which must be resisted in every way, for it would be followed by 
all the other Orders.’ 

The Suprema continued to treat the papal briefs as surrep- 
titious and, in 1658, Arce y Reynoso enjoyed a momentary 
triumph in a contest by summoning the vicar-general to Madrid 
and forcing him to come.’ Under the feebler government of the 
queen-regent, his successor Nithard was not so fortunate, in a 
fierce quarrel which involved the whole island in confusion and 
embroiled the rival departments of the government. May 9, 
1667, on a feast-day, in the church of San Francisco, Don Jorje 
Dameto struck his son-in-law, Don Joseph Vallejo, with a 
crutch, causing effusion of blood and thus polluting the church. 
Both gentlemen were familiars. The inquisitor, before noon-day, 
ordered the arrest of both; in the afternoon Bishop Manjarre 
cited Dameto to appear for sacrilege and violation of the church. 
The rival jurisdictions locked horns and proceeded to extremities. 
The viceroy and Audiencia, with the bulk of the community, 
sided with the bishop, but disturbances were commencing and 
they repeatedly urged postponement of action until the govern- 
ment could be heard from, but the inquisitor refused. The bishop 
published him as excommunicate, anathematized him and caused 
the psalm of malediction to be repeatedly sung against him, 
but the inquisitor continued to celebrate mass, exhibited himself 
conspicuously in public, forbade the bishop entrance into his 
own church and threatened to suspend his sacerdotal functions. 
On August 29th the bishop assembled a synod where arrangements 
were made to send an envoy to Rome to prosecute the case, with 
a printed statement of all the proceedings, a copy of which was 
furnished to the Council of Aragon. 

From Madrid, Nithard imperiously summoned the bishop to 
appear before him and plead his case. Under the canon law, the 
Inquisition had no jurisdiction over bishops, without a special 
delegation of papal faculties, and Manjarre was justified in declar- 
ing the summons null and void. Although, as an ecclesiastical 
question, the Council of Aragon had no direct competence, still 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 21, fol. 346; Lib. 52, fol. 26, 37; 
Lib. 54, fol. 64.—Bullar. Roman., V, 367. 
* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 52, fol. 86. 


Cuap. IV] THE SPIRITUAL COURTS 501 


as the peace of Majorca was seriously threatened and the viceroy 
was involved, it took a hand in the matter and thus were pre- 
sented the gravest questions with regard to the relations of the 
Inquisition with the episcopate, with the Holy See, and with the 
secular authorities. | 

Secure in the blind obedience of the queen, Nithard adopted 
the most aggressive attitude, and the queen submissively did 
whatever he required, for he assured her that the case was the 
most serious that had arisen since the foundation of the Inquisi- 
tion and that, on its rightful decision, depended the preservation 
or extinction, not alone of the Majorca tribunal, but of ail those 
under the crown of Aragon. To emphasize this he summoned 
the bishop to appear before him, personally or by procurator, 
within a term designated, in default of which he would be prose- 
cuted in contumacia. ‘To this the queen, in October, added her 
commands to the Council of Aragon; as the preservation of the 
Catholic faith required the maintenance of the authority of the 
Inquisition, the Council was ordered to write to the bishop to 
comply with the summons, and to the viceroy to assist the tribunal 
if necessary; the bishop must not appeal to Rome and if he had 
done so the letters must be intercepted and placed in her hands. 

The Council of Aragon did not obey. It held the matter until 
January 21, 1668, when it presented a consulta warning the 
queen of the consequences of her action and pointing out that 
the pope was the sole judge of bishops in important cases, as 
were provincial synods in trivial matters. Nithard, however, 
was superior to the Council of Trent, and the Suprema commenced 
a criminal prosecution of Bishop Manjarre, while, on February 
5th, an answer was prepared for the Council of Aragon, couched 
in a tone of bitterness and scarcely veiled contempt, which showed 
how fierce were the passions at work. The queen was assured 
that her action was in accordance with all previous royal pro- 
visions and she was asked to order the Council of Aragon to obey 
and not to interfere hereafter with ecclesiastical controversies. 
Before this missive was delivered, however, news came from 
Majorca that the culprit Dameto had withdrawn his appeal to 
the tribunal and had applied for absolution to the bishop, who 
considered the whole matier as settled. This was a staggering 
blow from which it took Nithard a month to recover, but finally 
he sent the consulta of February 5th with a postscript of March 
12th, arguing that a subject cannot impair his judge’s jurisdic- 


502 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


tion by accepting another and consequently that the situation 
was unaltered. 

The queen of course adopted this view and repeated her 
orders, but again the Council disobeyed her and presented, March 
18th, a consulta adjuring her in solemn terms to reflect calmly, 
for she was making the inquisitor-general a judge of all the bishops 
in her dominions, not only as to conflicts of jurisdiction but also 
as to criminal accusations, without his holding faculties from the 
pope, while, at the same time, she was forbidding appeals to the 
Holy See which was the only proper judge. She was warned that 
it was impossible to exaggerate the importance of the questions 
at issue and she was implored, before making so momentous a 
decision, to consult the Councils of Castile, Italy and the Indies, 
for the interests of the whole monarchy were involved as well as 
the supreme power of the pope. To this her reply was merely 
a repetition of her former orders and a demand for a duplicate 
of the letters of the Council to the Viceroy. For the third time 
it disobeyed her and sent none and there are intimations that it 
was engaged in arousing the whole Spanish episcopate to a sense 
of the impending danger. | 

Then the affair suddenly assumed another phase. On March 
7th the queen had written to her ambassador in Rome to procure 
the abstention of the pope from the matter, but, on that very 
day, the Congregation of the Inquisition, with the approval of 
the pope, had pronounced invalid the censures fulminated by the 
inquisitor. It was late in May before this was communicated 
to the queen by the nuncio, who said that the pope had recognized 
the gravity of the assault by an inquisitor on the episcopal dignity 
and the magnitude of the ensuing scandal, and had caused the 
whole subject to be carefully considered by the Congregation 
with the above result. The pope had felt deeply, not only the 
indignity offered to the episcopal office, but also that the fiscal 
of the Inquisition had applied to the queen to summon the bishop 
before it, solely on the ground of his having appealed to the Holy 
See. In the name of the pope the nuncio therefore asked the 
queen to order inquisitors not to proceed against bishops and to 
reject the application of the fiscal. 

Even this did not shake the determination of Nithard to reduce 
the episcopate to subjection. A long and argumentative consulta 
was presented to the queen, proving that the papal decision was 
surreptitious and therefore invalid, and that anyhow the decrees 


Cuap. IV] THE SPIRITUAL COURTS 503 


of the Roman Inquisition had no currency in Spain. The old 
prohibitions of appeals to Rome were invoked and the queen 
was told that one of the most precious jewels of the Spanish 
crown was at stake, for, unless the regalias were preserved, the 
Inquisition must disappear, delinquents would be unpunished, 
religion would suffer and, with the loss of its unity, there would 
no longer be obedience to the throne. The queen was therefore 
urged to stand firm; the prosecution of the bishop must not be 
suspended and the Council of Aragon must be forced to obey the 
royal commands. 

Nithard was ready to risk an open breach with the Holy See 
in his audacious ambition to render the Inquisition supreme in 
the Spanish Church. How far the queen would have suffered 
herself to be carried in the execution of his plans cannot be told, 
as the documents fail us here. His career, however, was drawing 
to a close. In February, 1669, he was driven from Spain amid 
universal execration, yet the prosecution of Bishop Manjarre was 
not abandoned, for the Inquisition was not accustomed openly 
to admit defeat. It dragged until his death, December 26, 1670, 
when it was quietly dropped.’ 

Practically the intervention of Rome gave the victory to the 
Mallorquins, of which they took advantage. In 1671 there arose 
another quarrel over a fine incurred by a canon who was also a 
consultor of the tribunal. Both sides exchanged excommuni- 
cations and Inquisitor-general Valladares, profiting by his pre- 
decessor’s experience, showed moderation. On the plea that 
it was a matter of government rather than of jurisdiction, the 
Suprema ordered the tribunal to abandon the case and remove 
the censures imposed on the canons, but the !atter were not 
content with this and procured from the Roman Holy Office a 
decree declaring invalid the censures of the inquisitors and valid 
those of the executors of the brief. The Council of Aragon com- 
municated this to the queen who submissively signed a letter, 
January 25, 1672, to the chapter, expressing her confidence that 
in its use they would pay fitting attention to the peace and 
advantage of the Church.’ 

The Inquisition was not accustomed to defeat and it chafed 
under this, as was shown when, in 1690, a quarrel arose because 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 25, fol. 23, 54, 86-105; Lib. 52, fol. 
53, 86, 92, 100, 125, 335. 
2 Ibidem, Lib. 52, fol. 335. 


504 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


a priest of Minorca, named Juan Bruells, used insulting words 
to the commissioner, Rafael Pons. For this he was prosecuted 
and the case threw all the islands into confusion. The viceroy, 
the Audiencia and the clergy all united against the Inquisition. 
The Ordinary of Minorca, as executor of the brief of 1642, forcibly 
released Bruells, forbade the inquisitor to proceed and, on his 
disobeying, excommunicated him. About this time the Mal- 
lorquin tribunal had claims to consideration arising from its 
vigorous proceedings against Judaizers and the large resultant 
confiscations. The Suprema espoused its cause with the usual 
energy and, in repeated consultas to Carlos III, denounced the 
papal briefs as surreptitious and invalid, full of defects and nulli- 
ties. The feeble king issued repeated commands for the prose- 
cution of Bruells and the surrender of the briefs, but no one paid 
attention to them. The Mallorquin clergy procured from the 
Congregation of the Inquisition a decree validating the censures 
pronounced by the Ordinary and annulling those of the inquisitor; 
the pope confirmed this but subsequently suspended it at the 
earnest solicitation of the Spanish ambassador, at the same time 
ordering his nuncio to make the king understand that the Con- 
gregation had supreme power to decide all questions of jurisdic- 
tion. The affair did not result to the satisfaction of the Inquisi- 
tion for the last we hear of it is a bitter complaint by the Suprema, 
March 11, 1693, of the contumacious Mallorquins and the miser- 
able condition to which they had reduced the Inquisition. In 
Minorca, the clergy and their dependents were so hostile that 
Pons could not find a church in which to celebrate mass, while 
the officials were shunned as excommunicated heretics.’ 


Another jurisdiction with which there were occasional quarrels 
was that of the army, for soldiers were exempt from the secular 
courts. In such competencias settlements were made by a junta 
of two members each of the Suprema and the Council of War, 
with final reference to the king in case of disagreement. J have 
happened to meet with but few cases of this and they seem never 
to have attained the importance of those with the secular and 
ecclesiastical courts. One occurred in 1629, arising from disputes 
with the garrison that had occupied the Aljaferia since the troubles 
of 1591. A somewhat curious case was that of Don Fernando 


* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 52,.fol. 292, 312, 335. 


Cuap. IV] MILITARY ORDERS 505 


Antonio Herrera Calderon, of Santander, who was alguazil and 
familiar and who resigned, in 1641, from his military company, 
although warned that, by so doing during hostilities, he would be 
tried by the Council of War. It naturally claimed him and the 
Suprema endeavored to protect him.’ It would seem that, towards 
the end of the eighteenth century, the exemption of the military 
was causing special troubles, for a royal cédula of February 9, 
17938, declares that, to put an end to them, in future the military 
judges shall have exclusive cognizance of all cases, civil and 
criminal, in which soldiers are defendants, except inheritances, 
and that no tribunal or judge of any kind shall form a competencia 
concerning them under any pretext.’ 


There was yet another independent jurisdiction with which the 
Inquisition occasionally came into collision. In Spain the Mili- 
tary Orders formed so important a body that, among the State 
Councils, there was one of Orders, which had exclusive jurisdiction 
over their members. It will be recalled that one of Ferdinand’s 
most efficient measures to ensure the peace of the kingdom was 
to obtain the perpetual administration of those of Santiago, 
Calatrava and Alcéntara, while the queen assumed that of Mon- 
tesa. Yet he was not disposed to favor their claims of exemp- 
tion in temporal matters from the jurisdiction of the Inquisition. 
A letter of September 15, 1515, to the tribunal of Jaen, says that 
certain confiscations involve property held by knights of the 
three Orders who may claim exemption and refuse to plead before 
the judge of confiscations; if so they are not to be listened to and, 
if necessary, are to be prosecuted with the full rigor of the law.? 

In civil and criminal matters the members of the Orders 
asserted exemption from the jurisdiction of the Inquisition, lead- 
ing to disputes more or less acrimonious. In 1609, at Cérdova, 
Don Diego de Argoté, a Knight of Santiago, with levelled pistol, 
prevented the arrest of one of his servants by officials of the 
tribunal. A competencia resulted which, when carried up to 
Philip III, was decided by him in favor of the Council of Orders. 
To this the Suprema replied in a consulta, fortelling the entire 
destruction of the Inquisition in case the decision was allowed to 
stand and so worked on Philip that he reversed his decree and 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 940, fol. 161; Lib. 21, fol. 300. 
? Tbidem, Legajo 1473. 3 Tpidean Lib. 3, fol. 425. 


506 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


allowed the Suprema to prosecute the culprit... The complica- 
tion caused by these class privileges is illustrated in the case 
alluded to above, occurring in 1648, at Cuenca, of Mufioz de 
Castilblanque for the murder of the priest Jacinto. He was a 
Knight of Calatrava which led to an additional competencia, 
when the junta could not agree and the king had to decide.’ 

In their contests with the Orders, the tribunals were apt to 
exhibit the same unscrupulous spirit as in those with other con- 
testants. In Majorca Doctor Ramon Sureda, canon, chancellor 
and judge of competencias, was likewise conservator of the Mili- 
tary Orders. In 1657 he complained that, in conflicts of jurisdic- 
tion, the inquisitor would not form competencias with him in 
order that the papers might take the regular course of transmis- 
sion for settlement by the Suprema and Council of Orders. The 
king and queen therefore, as administrators of the Orders, in- 
structed him in such case to send to the inquisitor three successive 
messages and report them and their replies to the Council; if, in 
spite of this, the tribunal continued to prosecute the case, he was 
to proceed against the inquisitor and the viceroy was to render 
him all proper support. The inquisitor ingeniously evaded this in 
the case of Gaspar Puygdorfilio, a Knight of Santiago, in 1661, by 
refusing to receive any messages, saying that he received them 
only from the viceroy. Sureda’s report of this was left unnoticed 
and the inquisitor adopted the same device, in 1662, in the case 
of Francisco de Veri, a Knight of Montesa, prosecuted for wound- 
ing a familiar who had drawn a sword upon him. He refused to 
recelve messages and proceeded to sequestrate Veri’s property, 
including his crops and cattle. To save them from destruction 
the viceroy interposed and the Council of Orders appealed to the 
queen, as administrator of the Order, to take some action that 
should enable such questions to be settled peaceably, but appar- 
ently without result.’ 


As though the exempted classes were not numerous and 
troublesome enough, there was a project, in 1574, of adding 
another which, if carried into effect, would have altered the 
destiny of Spain by subjecting it eventually to the Inquisition 
and reducing the nominal monarch to the position of a rot fainéant 


? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 927, fol. 323. 
? Ibidem, Lib. 940, fol. 161. 
§ Ibidem, Lib. 52, fol. 222. 


Cuap. IV] MILITARY ORDERS 507 


under a Mayor of the Palace. It is a most impressive illustration 
of the spirit of the age that such a project should have been 
formulated, that it received enthusiastic support and that a 
sovereign so jealous of his prerogative as Philip II should have 
even allowed it to be debated, much less have let it assume a 
menacing shape and have given it serious consideration. <A 
Military Order was to be established under the name of Santa 
Maria de la EKspada Blanca, with a white sword as a symbol, 
like the red sword of Santiago. At its head was to be the inquis- 
itor-general, to whom all members were to swear allegiance and 
whose orders in peace and war all were to obey. To him likewise 
they were to assign their property, receiving back at his hands 
what was necessary for their support, and after death their widows 
were to be pensioned by him. They were to be exempt from all 
jurisdiction save his, which was to be delegated to priors ap- 
pointed in all the provinces. The ostensible object was the 
defence of the faith and of Spain, for which they were at any time 
liable to be called to the field, or to serve in garrison, under the 
orders of the inquisitor-general. Thus the Inquisition was to be 
furnished with an organized force, sworn to blind obedience and 
released from all other obligations. The only requisite for member- 
ship was limpieza, or purity of blood, free from all taint of Judaic 
or Moorish contamination, or descent from those who had been 
sentenced for heresy. At this period limpieza was becoming a 
popular mania; the cost of proving it through four generations 
was considerable, and there was strong temptation in the promise 
that the expenses of all applicants would be defrayed from the 
common fund. 

The project may seem to us too wild to merit a thought, but 
it responded so perfectly to the temper of the time that it was 
enthusiastically adopted by the provinces of Castile, Leon, Biscay, 
Navarre, Aragon, Valencia, Catalonia, Asturias and Galicia. 
Procurators from these provinces submitted it to Philip for his 
approval and were supported by representatives of forty-eight 
noble houses and of the archiepiscopal sees of Toledo, Santiago, 
Seville, Saragossa, Valencia, Tarragona and Granada. It was 
debated earnestly and at much length, but the argument of Pedro 
Vinegas de Cordova decided its fate. He pointed out the troubles 
which were already arising on the subject of limpieza, causing 
jealousies, hatreds and contentions, to be increased enormously 
if the population was thus to be divided into two classes; also the 


508 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


fact that the royal courts would have left to their jurisdiction 
only the New Christians, while the Old Christians would have 
their special judges and, if the comparatively few existing famil- 
iars caused such all-pervading troubles, what the effect would be 
of increasing without limit the number of the exempt. On the one 
hand the ambitious and able men among the New Christians, 
being thus cast out, would foment disaffection and disturbance; 
on the other, if the old Military Orders had been a source of 
danger to the monarchy, what would be the effect of creating 
a new one, united and vastly more numerous and subject as 
vassals to an inquisitor-general, whose power was already so 
great, and who would control the property and have jurisdiction 
over all members, while in case of rebellion the frontiers and 
strongholds would bein his hands? This reasoning was unanswer- 
able; Philip ordered all papers connected with the project to be 
surrendered; he imposed perpetual silence on its advocates and 
wrote to the ecclesiastical and secular bodies to abandon it, for 
justice and protection would never be lacking.’ 


We shall probably do no injustice to the Inquisition in attribut- 
ing to the profits accruing from the exercise of its temporal 
jurisdiction the ruthless vigor with which the tribunals sought 
to vindicate and extend it. The remarks of the Visitor Cer- 
vantes with regard to Barcelona, in 1561 (p. 468), indicate how 
lucrative it could be made and how welcome was the addition 
of fees and fines to the somewhat meagre salaries of the officials. 
This explains the reckless violence which became habitual in the 
conduct of quarrels, because this not only was an assurance to 
the parties concerned as to the vigor with which they were 
defended, but it also served to discourage the secular authorities 
from resisting encroachments. It also explains the multiplication 
of the unsalaried officials such as familiars, commissioners and 
their notaries, assessors, deputies etc., which no laws or Con- 
cordias or regulations could restrain, for each one was a possible 
source of profit to the tribunal and a probable cause of disturb- 
ance in his vicinage, through the comfortable assurance of 
immunity from the law. 

The natural result of this was that unprofitable business was 
neglected for profitable, and the suppression of heresy was post- 
poned to the trial of civil and criminal cases which yielded fees. 


1 Cabrera, Felipe Segundo, Lib. X, cap. xviii. 


Cuap. IV] EVILS OF THE SYSTEM 509 


We have seen how Cervantes reported that in Barcelona this 
seemed to be the real duty of the tribunal and that there was 
nothing else to be attended to; his animadversions produced no 
amendment and, in 1567, de Soto Salazar repeated the complaint.’ 
This continued unchecked. The project of reform presented to 
the Suprema, in 1623, expresses the wish that other tribunals 
would follow the example of Saragossa, where one of the inquisi- 
tors was delegated every four months to conduct this business, 
so that prisoners on trial for heresy could have their cases 
despatched and not be kept languishing interminably in prison, 
which, as we shall see, was one of the sorest abuses inflicted on 
them.? This pious wish was fruitless and the records of the 
Inquisition for the following century show how large a portion 
of its activity was devoted to these cases and to the competencias 
incessantly springing from them. 

One feature which aggravated the oppression in these matters, 
especially in civil suits, was not only the favoritism which inevi- 
tably inclined the tribunal to the side of its own people, but the 
fact that the inquisitors were usually strangers, unfamiliar with 
the local laws and customs peculiar to each province, which they 
presumed to interpret and enforce. This Justified the frequent 
demands that inquisitors should be natives—demands which 
received no attention, for the appointing power thought only of 
their qualifications as judges of the faith while, to the mass of 
the population, their duties in this respect were of small account 
in comparison with their activity in their temporal jurisdiction. 
Another well-grounded source of complaint was that the inquisi- 
torial habits of secrecy could not be wholly overcome; the parties 
and their counsel were not allowed to be present, as in the royal 
courts; witnesses were examined by the inquisitor on lists of 
interrogatories furnished to him, and there was no cross-exami- 
nation; written arguments were presented to him which he handed 
to the other side for reply and the procedure, in both civil and 
criminal cases, was assimilated as nearly as might be to the secret 
trials for heresy which was the inquisitorial ideal of the dispensa- 
tion of justice. The cases were decided by the inquisitors in 
session together, on a majority vote. In the sixteenth century 
there was no appeal to the Suprema, even when the vote was 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Visitas de Barcelona, Leg. 15, fol. 1, 20. 
2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 926, fol. 19.—Archivo hist. nacional, 
Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 1, n. 1. 


510 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


not unanimous, but, in 1645, a writer assumes that either side 
could appeal.’ 

Wehave seen how tenaciously the kingdoms of Aragon struggled 
against the evils of the system. Castile felt them equally but it 
had not the same institutions and could only remonstrate. The 
Cértes of Madrid, in 1607-8, represented that those of 1579 and 
1586 had petitioned for the reform of the abuses arising from the 
temporal jurisdiction of the Inquisition to the great injury of 
the kingdom; that Philip II had promised relief, but had died 
without granting it, and therefore the request was now repeated 
in view of the increasing evils. Especially was attention called 
to the cruelty of imprisoning ordinary offenders, for the people 
could not distinguish and imagined all prisoners to be heretics, 
thus entailing infamy upon them and disqualifying them for 
marriage, wherefore it was asked that they be confined in the 
public gaols. Philip III promised to do what was proper and 
of course did nothing. The Cértes of 1611 repeated the petition, 
with similar lack of result.’ 

The Council of Castile, the highest tribunal in the land, in a 
consulta of 1631, represented forcibly the existing evils, espe- 
cially the prodigal use of censures under which corregidores and 
other magistrates lay under excommunication for months together, 
while individuals were impoverished by the long delays in settling 
competencias. It urged the remedy of permitting appeals to the 
Council por via de fuerza, in cases not of faith and this it repeated 
in 1634, 1669 and 1682. More outspoken was a memorial pre- 
sented, in 1648, to Philip by a member of the Council, on the 
abuses of the criminal jurisdiction, those in civil cases being 
treated in a separate paper. The writer alludes to having re- 
peatedly made the same representations orally and in writing; 
he dwells upon the interminable delays and other obstacles which 
impede justice and discourage sufferers from seeking it. The 
resultant immunity creates audacious criminals; the number of 
familiars and of soldiers who never serve in the field has increased 
so greatly that nothing is seen but crimes and the offenders are 
unpunished. Everywhere men of the most dissolute type and 


1 Modo de Proceder, fol. 31-9, 86-97 (Bibl. nacional, MSS., D, 122) —Archivo 
hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 365, n. 45.—Archivo de Simancas, 
Inquisicion, Lib. 926, fol. 23.—Rojas de Heret. P. 1, n. 442. 

? Liorente, Hist. crit. Cap. xxvu, Art. 1. n. 3, 4. 

* Consulta Magna (Bibl. nacional, MSS., Q, 4). 


Cuap. IV] EVILS OF THE SYSTEM 511 


the largest fortunes seek appointment so as to enjoy immunity; 
the royal revenues are defrauded and prohibited goods are 
imported, while no corregidor or alcalde dares to curb them, for 
they are at once excommunicated by the inquisitors, even to 
casting interdicts over whole communities. ‘Those who suffer 
remain without redress, so that those who are able are led to take 
it into their own hands, for they can get it nowhere else. Justice 
is trampled under foot; there is no alguazil who dares to make 
an arrest, or scrivener to draw up papers, so many have been 
slain or wounded for so doing and the death of an alguazil is held 
at naught, as though the officers of justice were common enemies. 
If the king would re-establish the jurisdiction of the royal courts 
there would be an end to the excommunications with which the 
inquisitors defend their delinquents, as though they were vessels 
of the Temple; the time of the Councils and of the king would 
not be consumed by these perpetual competencias and the 
plagues would cease wherewith God afflicts these kingdoms for 
the injustice, the violence and the dissolute life of the people. 

These warnings and remonstrances fell on deaf ears. The 
Suprema was skilled to work upon the piety of the king, and to 
promise him relief from perils if he would placate God by increas- 
ing the privileges of the Inquisition, the very existence of which 
depended upon its ability to protect its familars from the law and 
from: the universal hatred in which they were held. 

After the fall of Inquisitor-general Nithard, there was a bustling 
attempt to check the enormous evils admitted to exist. In 1677 
Carlos II deprecated the abuses common, both in excessive charges 
and in forcing his pious subjects to submit by censures which 
deprived them of the consolations of religion. He declared 
excommunication to be illegal in matters connected exclusively 
with laymen and temporal possessions, and forbade its employ- 
ment, a command which he addresed to the Suprema in 1678 
with directions to enforce it and which he repeated in 1691, but 
without effect.2, Then a more comprehensive effort was made to 
effect a radical reform. In 1696, Carlos was induced to assemble 
what was known as the Junta Magna, consisting of two members 
each of the Councils of State, of Aragon, of Castile, of Italy, of 
Indies and of Orders. The decree creating it recites the disturb- 


1 Bibl. nacional, MSS., D, 118, fol. 188. 
? Autos Acordados, Lib. Iv, Tit. 1, Auto 4, cap. 13, 14, 18.—Novfs Recop. 
Lib. 1, Tit. vii, ley 5.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Leg. 1465, fol. 99. 


512 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


ance and interference with justice, the continual collisions and 
competencias between the Inquisition and the courts over ques- 
tion of jurisdiction and privileges, and the necessity of establishing 
some fixed principles and rules to avert these troubles for the 
future and to preserve the Holy Office in the love and reverence 
of the people, without its interfering in matters foreign to its 
venerable purpose. The Junta was to meet at least once a week 
and it was furnished with materials from the records of all the 
Councils, through which it obtained a thorough insight into the 
evils to be remedied. These labors resulted in a memorial known 
as the Consulta Magna, drawn up by Doctor Joseph de Ledesma 
of the Council of Castile. 

It constituted a terrible indictment of the abuse, by the Inquisi- 
tion, of the temporal jurisdiction bestowed on it by the sovereigns, 
with ample proof of flagrant cases and incidents. Then followed 
a consideration of possible remedies, of which the most inais- 
pensable was declared to be the prohibition of censures, which 
were so formidable that no one could resist them. Persons 
arrested for offences not of faith should be confined in the royal 
prisons to save them from the indelible disgrace of the secret 
prison. The recurso de fuerza should be admitted when excom- 
munication was used in temporal cases. The fuero should be 
withdrawn from the servants and commensals of officials whose 
insolence gave occasion to arrests and censures causing dissen- 
sions that scandalized the whole kingdom. It was admitted that 
familiars now gave little trouble, save in Majorca, where there 
was no Concordia, but the salaried officials were the source of 
infinite contention and they should be put on the footing of 
familiars. A grievance of the greatest magnitude was the inter- 
minable delay in the settlement of competencias, during which 
prisoners languished in confinement and excommunicates could 
not obtain absolution; this could be averted if the Concordias and 
royal orders were enforced. As all attempts to curb the Inquisi- 
tion had proved useless, and in spite of them it had continually 
increased its abuses, the ultimate remedy of depriving it wholly 
of the royal jurisdiction might be found necessary, but mean- 
while these milder measures might be tried in hope of relief.’ 
These proposed remedies, it will be seen, were moderate enough 


? Tam not aware that this interesting document has been printed. There are 
copies of it in the Bibl. nacional, MSS., Q, 4, and G, 344, and in the Library of 
the University of Halle, Ye, 17. 


Cuap. IV] EVILS OF THE SYSTEM 513 


and in no way limited the Inquisition in its ostensible functions 
as the preserver of the faith. 

This was the most formidable assault that the Inquisition had 
experienced, coming as it did from the combined forces of all the 
other organizations of the State, under the auspices of the king, 
but it was easily averted. Llorente tells us that Inquisitor-general 
Rocaberti, working through the royal confessor Froilan Diaz, who 
was ex-officio a member of the Suprema, and also Rocaberti’s 
subject in the Dominican Order, succeeded in inducing Carlos to 
consign the consulta to the limbo in which reposed so many 
previous memorials.*’ The manner in which this was effected was 
simple enough. In 1726 Don Santiago Augustin Riol drew up 
for Philip V a report on the creation and organization of the 
state councils, in which he states that the consulta was submitted 
to the Council of Castile for its action; this was delayed by the 
illness of the governor of the Council; when he returned to duty 
the matter was forgotten and the consulta disappeared so com- 
pletely that, when Philip V called for it, in 1701, no copy could 
be found in the archives, as appeared from a certificate furnished 
by the archivist.’ 


This narrow escape did not teach moderation. In 1702 the 
Valencia tribunal refused even to join in a competencia over a 
case in which it entertained a suit brought to collect the interest 
on a censo, by the widow of an alguazil mayor as guardian of her 
children. It was in vain that the regent of the Audiencia pointed 
out that, under the Concordia of 1568, the widow of an official 
only enjoyed the fuero as defendant and not as plaintiff and that 
the children had no claim whatever, and cited precedents that 
had been so decided; the tribunal was stubborn and would not 
even admit that the question could be carried up to the Suprema 
and Council of Aragon for decision.’ It was not long after this, 
however, that the Suprema was obliged to admit that reforms 
in the methods of the Holy Office were essential. In its carta 
acordada of June 27, 1705, is embodied a rebuke of the reckless- 
ness with which the tribunals undertook the defence of their 
officials, resulting in the universal complaints of the abuse of its 
jurisdiction, so that it was popularly said that everything was 


1 Llorente, Hist. crit. Cap. xxv1, Art. ii, n. 35; Cap. xxxrx, Art. ii, n. 17. 
? Riol, Informe (Semanario ertidito, III, 157). 
8 Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 1, n. 3, fol. 16. 


33 


514 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


made a caso de Inquisicion, to the disrepute of its officials and their 
families. Therefore, unless the jurisdiction was indisputable, the 
Suprema must be consulted before assuming the defence, amicable 
adjustments must always be sought and friendly relations be 
maintained with the royal officials, thus avoiding competencias 
which ordinarily arose from passionate conflicts over trifles.* 
These were wise admonitions to which as usual scant attention 
was paid, but in time the tribunals were made to recognize the 
change which had come in with the Bourbons. There was a 
highly illustrative case in 1720, at Toledo, where Don Pedro 
Paniagua, contador or auditor of the tribunal, received in October 
twenty sacks of cocoa from Cadiz. In the intricate details of 
the Spanish system of internal imposts, it would be impossible 
now to say whether he had observed the formalities requisite in 
the transmission of merchandise, but the local authorities assumed 
that there was a violation of law and also an infraction of quaran- 
tine, imposed in August, owing to an epidemic in Marseilles. 
The corregidor was prompt; at 2 a.m. of the day following the 
arrival of the cocoa, he searched Paniagua’s country house and 
at 9 a.m. his town house and sequestrated the cocoa. The inquisi- 
tors responded by imprisoning the civic guards who had been 
employed. A fortnight later, another visit paid to Paniagua’s 
house showed that five sacks of the sequestrated article had been 
removed, whereupon he was confined in the royal prison. Then 
the inquisitors proceeded against the corregidor and alcalde 
mayor with censures, and aggravated them so energetically that 
in twenty-four hours they had an interdict and cessatio a divinis 
in four parishes of the city. These active demonstrations, how- 
ever suited to the seventeenth century, were out of place in the 
eighteenth. As soon as news of them reached Madrid, hurried 
orders were despatched by the Suprema to remove the interdict, 
absolve the officials and release the guards, and when the formal 
report came from the tribunal the orders were repeated, with 
the addition that the senior inquisitor should start for Madrid 
within twenty-four hours. Prior to receiving this the inquisitors 
had written to Inquisitor-general Camargo lamenting his abandon- 
ment of them and the dishonor inflicted on the tribunal; they 
blushed to be accomplices in this ruin and they tendered their 
resignations. The answer to this was sending the senior Inquisi- 
tor of Madrid to take charge of the tribunal, with orders to the 


1 Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 10, n. 2, fol. 178. 


Cuap. IV] CURTAILMENT OF PRIVILEGES 515 


two remaining inquisitors to report in Madrid but, on learning 
that they had obeyed the first orders, they were allowed to remain 
in Toledo. 

How strong had been the pressure exerted on the Suprema to 
produce this action may be inferred from a protest in which, a 
month later, it poured forth to Philip V its bitterness of soul. 
The corregidor had violated the privileges and immunities of 
the Inquisition; the inquisitors had been perfectly justified in 
their action, although too speedy in aggravating the censures; 
they had been humiliated, while the corregidor and his underlings 
were boasting of their triumph over the Inquisition and of depriv- 
ing it of the rights granted by the popes and the kings of Spain. 
The Suprema therefore asked that the senior inquisitor be allowed 
to return to Toledo, that Paniagua be released by the hands of 
the inquisitors, that his cocoa be restored and that the corregidor 
and alcalde mayor be duly punished. This accomplished nothing 
and two months later it again appealed to the king for the release 
of Paniagua and the restoration of the senior inquisitor, but this 
time it professed its zeal to see that in future the tribunals should 
practise more moderation.” The lesson was a hard one, but it 
had a still harder one, in 1734, when Philip decided that a salaried 
official should be tried by the ordinary courts.’ 

Step by step the old-time privileges were being curtailed. Soon 
after the accession of Fernando VI, some trouble arose at Llerena 
over the taxation of familiars. It seems to have been aggravated 
in the usual manner and, when it reached the king, it was of a 
character that induced him to issue a decree, October 5, 1747, by 
which the Council of Castile was given jurisdiction over the 
officials of the Inquisition. This called forth a heated remon- 
strance, dated November Ist, which must have proceeded from 
the Inquisitor-general Prado y Cuesta, for no other subject 
would have dared thus to address his sovereign. The writer tells 
him that the decree is unworthy of his name and his faith, nor is it 
well that the world should see him, in the first year of his reign, 
discharge such a thunderbolt against the Holy Office, such as it 
had never received since its foundation, leaving it prostrated by 
the shock.’ He affirms before God, and would wish to write it with 
his blood, that the service of Jesus Christ and the prosperity of 


1 Bibl. nacional, MSS., R, 102, fol. 147-60. 
2 Autos Acordados, Lib. tv, Tit. i, Gloss 1. 


516 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


the king and his kingdoms require that the decree be returned to 
the royal hands, without a copy being allowed to remain.* 

Although this decree was not effective as to the salaried offi- 
cials, the Inquisition was falling upon evil days. It no longer 
inspired the old-time awe; it was no longer striving to extend its 
prerogatives, but was fighting a losing battle to maintain them. 
A writer of about this period deplores its decadence; its commis- 
sioners and familiars serve without pay and the only reward for 
their labors and the cost of making their proofs of limpieza is 
the exemptions of pure honor granted by the kings, but now 
scarce one of these is observed and no fit persons seek the positions, 
although they are much needed, for there are not a tenth part of 
those allowed by the Concordias.? There is probably some truth 
in this, for Inquisitor-general Prado y Cuesta, in appointing, at 
the request of the tribunal of Valencia, Fray Vicente Latorre as 
calificador or censor, asks why, when there are so many learned 
canons and professors in Valencia, who formerly were eager in 
seeking the position, it had now fallen so greatly in estima- 
tion. 

It was difficult for the Inquisition to reconcile itself to the 
tendencies of the age and several cases, about this time, in which 
the tribunal of Valencia refused even to admit competencias, 
asserting that its combined ecclesiastical and royal jurisdictions 
rendered it the sole judge of all that concerned its officials, show 
that the old spirit still lingered and found expression whenever 
it dared.* Carlos III, however, was even more assertive of the 
royal prerogative than his brother Fernando. We have seen 
his orders of 1763 concerning municipal and police regulations 
which included the prohibitions of carrying concealed weapons 
and exporting money, in all of which familiars were wholly re- 
moved from the jurisdiction of the Inquisition, and in 1775 a 
competencia in Cérdova caused him emphatically to order 
the inviolable observance of this decree.’ All this led to the 
change in the commissions of familiars as regards carrying arms, 
which was brought about, in 1777, by the authorities of Alcala la 
Real and Seville refusing to register commissions issued by the 


? Archivo de Alcal4, Hacienda, Leg. 544? (Libro 10). 

? Ibidem, Estado, Leg. 2843. 

* Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 14, n. 3, fol. 132. 
* Ibidem, Leg. 1, n. 3, fol. 3, 16 

5 Novis. Recop.,- Lib. 1, Tit. vii, leyes 9, 10. 


Cuap. IV] COMPETENCIAS 517. 


tribunals of Toledo and Seville, because they were not in accord- 
ance with the new regulations. In place, as of old, of blustering 
and coercing the magistrates, the Suprema collected from all the 
tribunals the formulas employed by them and framed a new one, 
phrased in a very different spirit and in accordance with the royal 
edicts.’ 


That the endless quarrels which we have been considering 
ought to be settled in an amicable manner was so self-evident 
that, from an early period, persistent efforts had been made to 
accomplish it, resulting in the “competencia” so frequently 
alluded to above. Originally it would seem that there was no 
established procedure and that the Inquisition settled for itself 
all questions arising with the magistrates. After the first opposi- 
tion had been broken down these were not numerous, until the 
attribution of the fuero to the officials, and the enormous multi- 
plication of familiars and other unsalaried officers, gave occasion 
for collisions with the courts. The earliest attempt that I have 
met to provide a method of settlement is a cédula, issued about 
1535 by the empress-regent in the absence of Charles V, ordering 
that, when there was a dispute about jurisdiction, the president 
and judges of the royal court should meet the inquisitors and 
arrange matters harmoniously, so that it should not be known 
that there had been a difference between them. It was in con- 
formity with this that, in 1542, when Joaquin de Tunes was. 
tried in Barcelona for the murder of Juan Ballell, a familiar, the 
inquisitor, Miguel Puig, held a conference with the regent and 
judges of the royal chancellery, prior to the arrest, and the 
custody of the accused was settied without difficulty. It was 
impossible, however, to preserve peace between classes mutually 
jealous, and we have seen (p. 435) the troubles which Prince Philip 
endeavored to settle by the cédula of May 15, 1545. This favored 
the royal jurisdiction and produced complaints from the Suprema 
as when, in 1548, it represented to Charles V that in Granada 
the judges made the cédula a pretext to intervene in the business 
of the tribunal, whenever any one made a complaint, requiring 
the inquisitors to interrupt their work and come to the Audiencia, 
when they were ordered not to proceed and, if this was disobeyed, 
the judges raised a great disturbance. All this would cease if 
the old rule were restored that any one feeling aggrieved must 


1 Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 15, n. 11, fol. 45. 


518 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


appeal to the Suprema where he would get justice." Prince 
Philip’s cédula of 1553 settled this as far as concerned matters 
of faith, but neither it nor the Castilian Concordia of the same 
year could prevent disputes over the immunities of the officials 
and familiars which the Inquisition was persistently endeavoring 
to extend. The Concordia, however, endeavored to provide for 
the settlement of these by the process described above (p. 436) 
which became technically known as competencia. It is remark- 
able that, in the Valencia Concordia of 1554, there is no such 
provision, but in that of 1568, for the Aragonese kingdoms, it 
appears in the slightly different form that the regent of the 
Audiencia and the senior inquisitor should consult and endeavor 
to come to some agreement. If they could not do so, the regent 
was to send his side of the case to the Council of Aragon and the 
inquisitor his to the Suprema, when the king would arrange how 
the matter should be decided.? The two formulas were combined 
in practice and remained the established method of settling 
conflicts of jurisdiction. 

This should have produced peace but we have seen that it only 
gave occasion for fresh subjects of discord. The inquisitors were 
restive under any restraint on their arbitrary methods and 
already in 1560, a carta acordada of November 14th warns them 
that they are not to proceed with censures against the judges, 
when the latter offer competencias, but are to send the papers 
to the Suprema and await the result, under a penalty of twenty 
ducats for every infraction of the rule.2 The inquisitors however 
avoided competencias as far as they could and, when obliged to 
concede them, the opportunity was taken of humiliating the 
royal judges and make them feel their inferiority in a manner 
most galling to men so tenacious of the respect due to position 
and so insistent on courtesy. When de Soto Salazar reports 
of the inquisitors of Barcelona that, when they had occasion to 
notify the lieutenant of the king or the regent of the Audiencia, 
they sent a messenger to summon him and then kept him waiting 
in the antechamber and that sometimes they called the judges 
before them and scolded them without cause, we can readily 
appreciate the intensity of the hatred thus excited.‘ 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 13, fol. 16.—Proceso contra Joaquin 
de Tunes (MSS. of Am. Philos. Society). 

? Actos de Corte del Reyno de Aragon, fol. 96 (Zaragoza, 1664). 

* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 942, fol. 22. 

* Tbidem, Visitas de Barcelona, Leg. 17, fol. 20. 


Cuap. IV] COMPETENCIAS 519 


So, when the Inquisition established its formula for compe- 
tencias, they were sedulously framed to be as arrogantly insulting 
as possible. The first mandate inhibits peremptorily the judge 
from action and orders him to remit the case to the tribunal 
within twenty-four hours. If an arrest has been made the 
prisoner is to be discharged on bail to present himself before 
the inquisitors and any property seized or sequestrated is to be 
released. If the secular judge has any reason to allege to the 
contrary he is to present himself in person or by procurator to 
the tribunal, which will render justice, and all this is under holy 
obedience and the threat of major excommunication and a heavy 
fine. If there are any papers in the case the scrivener is ordered 
to surrender them, and the accuser or plaintiff is to appear within 
a time specified and receive justice, in default of which the case 
will be heard without him and without further notice. Then, if 
a reply is made to this alleging reasons for not obeying, a second 
mandate is issued pronouncing them insufficient and ordering 
the first one to be obeyed within a specified time under the above 
penalties. If the judge then proposes a competencia, a mandate 
is sent to him reciting the previous ones and saying that, to avoid 
troubling the higher powers, he is ordered to surrender all papers 
and suspend all action, or the excommunication and fine will be 
enforced on his person and property. The next mandate accepts 
the competencia, states that the tribunal is ready to forward its 
papers and orders the judges to send their side within twelve 
days, adding a threat of excommunication and fine if any addi- 
tional testimony be taken in the case. All this is phrased in the 
most mandatory fashion as of a superior addressing a subordinate 
and all these missives are ordered to be returned to the tribunal. 
If, after a competencia was formed, the familiar or official accepted 
the jurisdiction of the secular court, he was deprived of his com- 
mission. As we have frequently seen, there was no hesitation, 
at any stage of the proceedings, to excommunicate the judges, 
to anathematize them and to lay an interdict on the city, followed 
by a cessatio a divinis.* 

In addition to the gratification of thus humiliating the magis- 
trates, there was also in this truculence the object of rendering 
the process so offensive as to make them shrink from resisting 
the encroachments of the Inquisition. When this failed the 


1 Modo de Proceder, fol. 21-29 (Bibl. nacional, MSS., D, 122).—Archivo hist. 
nacional, Inquisicion de Toledo, Leg. 498. 


520 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


tribunal had abundant sources of annoyance in raising intermin- 
able questions of precedence and formalities, which were some- 
times fought so bitterly and long as virtually to supersede the 
original case. The points that could be raised were endless. In 
1602, the Count of Benavente, then Viceroy of Valencia, issued 
letters ordering a conference over the arrest of Gerédnimo Falcon; 
the tribunal surrendered him, admitting that the case did not 
pertain to it, but demanded that the viceroy and chancellery 
should cancel the letters on their records and, on refusal, it 
excommunicated the regent. The matter was carried up to the 
Suprema and Council of Aragon, when the king decided that the 
letters must be expunged and it was done in presence of a secre- 
tary of the Inquisition. The same humiliation had been inflicted 
on the count’s father, when he was viceroy, and also on the Duke 
of Segorbe.’ 

This arrogance continued until Carlos ITI, in his decree of 1775, 
informed the Inquisition that the royal jurisdiction which it 
exercised was on precisely the same level as that of his judges 
and magistrates; there must be entire equality between them; 
all threats of excommunication and fines must be abandoned; 
there must be free interchange of papers, mutual courtesy and 
no assumption of superiority. It was difficult for the tribunals 
to abandon the formulas which flattered their vanity and a second 
command was necessary, issued in 1783, on the occasion of a 
prolonged conflict of the Valencia tribunal with the alcalde of 
Consentaina. This finally produced obedience and the Suprema 
transmitted the royal order to Valencia with instructions for its 
observance.’ 


While this doubtless diminished the exasperation of these con- 
flicts, it did not check their frequency. They continued to be a 
constant source of trouble and it was from a desire to diminish 
this, as well as to extend its authority, that the Suprema, in 1806, 
forbade the tribunals from instituting them without submitting 
the case to it and receiving its approval.? When, under the 
Restoration, the Inquisition was revived, in 1814, the officials 
naturally claimed the fuero, active and passive, civil and criminal, 


1 Portocarrero, op. cit., fol. 47, 48. 

? Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 16, n. 5, fol. 25, 27, 39, 
52, 72. 

§ Ibidem, Leg. 17, n. 3, fol. 10. 


Cuap. 1V] MODERATION UNDER THE RESTORATION 521 


and Fernando VII, in the decision of a case carried up to him from 
Seville, announced, February 15, 1815, in no uncertain tones, 
that they should be protected in its enjoyment, but the cases 
appear to be rare and the aggressive spirit had disappeared.’ 
When, in Seville, the creditors of Francisco de Paula Esquivol 
complained of him to the tribunal, in place of defending him, it 
promptly dismissed him, June 27, 1815, an action which was 
confirmed by the Suprema.’ Even more significant was a case, 
in 1816, when in Seville Lorenzo Ayllon abused a priest while 
celebrating mass and endeavored to seize the sacrament, and the 
secular authorities arrested and proceeded to try him. In such 
a case there could be no question as to the jurisdiction of the 
Inquisiton, but there was no disturbance, and when the tribunal 
claimed his transfer to the secret prison the Suprema interposed 
and ordered that he should be allowed to remain in the public 
gaol, a detainer being lodged to prevent his discharge during his 
trial—a concession to the royal jurisdiction which would have 
petrified Pacheco or Arce y Reynoso.° 

There was the same disposition to avoid coming to extremes 
with the spiritual courts. In 1816 the provisor of the see of Tuy 
prosecuted Joseph Metzcler for impious, execrable and sacrilegious 
blasphemies. The tribunal of Santiago applied, in a courteous 
note, to the provisor for the papers and received a reply without 
signature. This the Suprema directed it to return and explain 
that there was no desire to invade the episcopal jurisdiction, but 
as the blasphemous propositions and acts of Metzcler might be 
heretical, of which the Inquisition had exclusive cognizance, it 
must insist on seeing the evidence to extract what appertained 
to it, after which the papers would be returned. It seems to have 
obtained the evidence for, on October 15, 1817, it voted to 
imprison Metzcler, as soon as his trial by the provisor should be 
ended, but the Suprema instructed it not to wait for this, as the 
jurisdiction of the Inquisition was privileged.‘ 


There was one peculiarly irritating feature in the position of 
the Inquisition in these quarrels, which exacerbated them greatly 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 559. 
2 Tbidem, Lib. 890. 

8 Tbidem, Lib. 890; Lib. 4357. 

4 Tbidem, Lib. 890. 


522 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


and often neutralized all efforts to maintain harmony—the 
power which it arrogated to itself of refusing to form compe- 
tencias on the ground that its rights were too clear to admit of 
debate. Thus it held that the salaried and titular officials, with 
their families and servants, were so wholly beyond all secular 
jurisdiction that it refused to entertain any proceedings in contest 
of their claims. It was in vain that Philip III, by a royal letter 
of 1615, declared that if inquisitors refused a conference, on the 
ground that the matter was too clear to justify it, the regent of 
the chancellery should form a competencia and forward the papers 
as usual.! It was equally useless for Philip IV to decree, in 1630, 
that when a contention was started by either party, the other 
must entertain it, no matter how clear it might be, under pain, 
for a first offence, of five hundred ducats and, for a second, of 
suspension during the royal pleasure. To ensure the imposition 
of the fine, each Council was to give the other faculties for its 
collection from offenders, but, when the Suprema forwarded this 
decree to the tribunals, with orders for its strict observance, it 
added significantly that it did not apply to cases of salaried and 
titular officials, though no such exception was made in the decree. 
It knew that Philip would never summon courage to enforce his 
law and it was right. When, in 1633, the Council of Aragon 
endeavored to collect such a fine, the Suprema interposed, assert- 
ing that it could only be done by consent of both Councils, which 
was, in effect, to invalidate the law, and Philip himself violated 
it, in 1634, when Augustin Vidal, messenger of the tribunal of 
Valencia, was arrested by the royal court for the murder of 
Juan Alonso Martinez, a Knight of Santiago and Bayle of 
Alicante. The tribunal demanded him and refused a compe- 
tencia, when Philip weakly ordered him to be surrendered ‘‘for 
this time and without prejudice to my royal jurisdiction.’” 

The Inquisition carried its point. Philip, by decisions of 1645 
and 1658, admitted that there could be no competencias in the 
case of salaried officials and the Suprema enforced these decisions 
by a carta acordada of August 7, 1662, pointing out that they 
must not be entertained where such officials were concerned; at 
the same time tribunals were warned to exercise moderation and 
not to employ censures without consulting it, unless delay was 


1 Portocarrero, op. cit., fol. 52. 
? Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 1, n. 3, fol. 49; Leg. 8, 
n. 1, fol. 422, 423; Libro 7 de Autos, Leg. 2, fol. 178. 


Cuap. IV] REFUSAL OF COMPETENCIAS 523 


inadmissible.” Even Philip however had to intervene against the 
consequences of his own acts, in 1664, when the portero of the 
tribunal of Logrofio killed in his house a priest, apparently through 
jealousy. The alcalde mayor prosecuted the murderer and 
arrested his wife; the tribunal excommunicated the alcalde and 
cast an interdict on the town. The Council of Aragon formed a 
competencia and claimed that during it the censures should be 
raised according to custom, but the Suprema refused on the 
ground that there could be no competencia. Philip was appealed 
to and ordered the censures raised for the unanswerable reason 
that as judges under excommunication could not hold their 
courts, if it were allowed thus to paralyze all judicial business 
it would have arbitrary control over all cases and frustrate all 
legal remedies.? This decision was disregarded. It seems ex- 
traordinary that any community would endure for centuries the 
indefinite stoppage of the administration of justice, constantly 
occurring through the reckless abuse of the power of excom- 
munication, as when, in 1672, we find the queen-regent applying 
to the inquisitor-general to know how she is to answer the com- 
plaints of the town of Logrofio at the prolonged suspension of 
the powers of the corregidor who lay under excommunication, 
seeing that there is no conclusion of the competencia which has 
been so long pending.° 

The Inquisition evidently aggravated as far as it could the 
public distress as a means of establishing its claims. In an 
effort to limit the abuse of refusing competencias, there was a 
junta formed, in 1679, from the Suprema and Council of State 
with the assistance of some theologians. This admitted that 
there could be no competencia in the cases of salaried officials, 
except when they held public office and were prosecuted for 
malfeasance, but it laid down the rule that, when the Suprema 
refused a competencia, the Council of State could appeal to the 
king who could appoint a junta to decide this secondary question. 
A limited time was allowed to the Suprema to state its reasons for 
refusal and during a competencia the accused was to be liberated 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Leg. 1465, fol. 79.—MSS. of Royal Library 
of Copenhagen, 218>, p. 351. 

2 Autos Acordados, Lib. rv, Tit. 1, Auto 3 (Nueva Recop., Lib. 11, Tit. vii, 
ley 3). 

8 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Leg. 1465, fol. 42. 


524 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


on bail and all censures were to be raised. This removed some 
of the hardships, but the Suprema seems to have sought to evade 
it by sullenly refusing to form the juntas with the Royal Councils, 
for another decree of Carlos II ordered it to attend when sum- 
moned so that these affairs might be settled.” It was in vain 
that, in 1730, the Council of Castile urged that competencias be 
admitted in all cases, for Philip V decided that the agreement of 
1679 should stand.* Probably not much was gained in the latest 
attempt to settle these perennial quarrels by Carlos IV in 1804, 
who ordered that when a conflict arose between a royal court 
and a tribunal, in a matter not of faith concerning an official, 
the court should refer the case to the governor of the Royal 
Council and the tribunal to the Suprema. These should then 
select an examiner who was to report to the Secretaria de Gracia 
y Justicia for the royal decision.‘ 


The evils of the system were admitted on all hands, but it 
was so vicious in principle that remedies were impossible. The 
customary juntas of two members each from the Suprema and 
the Council of Castile or of Aragon was at best a clumsy device, 
onerous on the Councils and usually leading only to procrastina- 
tion. To systematize it, in 1625, a permanent Junta Grande de 
Competencias’ was formed of two members from each Council, 
whose duty it should be to despatch all cases, and rules for it 
were framed in April, 1626, but it was short-lived. In 1634 Philip 
IV ordered the formation of a junta of two members each of the 
Suprema and Council of Castile to formulate a plan of relief, but, 
on June 9th of that year, the Suprema reported that it had never 
been able to accomplish a meeting of the Junta. Then, in 1657, 
the Junta Grande was resuscitated and we meet with an allusion 
to it in 1659, but it appears to have been abandoned soon after- 
wards.’ Ingenuity was at fault to alleviate the evils inseparable 
from the permanent antagonism between the rival jurisdictions. 


+ Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Leg. 1465, fol. 47; Lib. 918, fol. 830.— 
Bibl. nacional, MSS., R, 102, fol. 157-8.—Autos Acordados, Lib. tv, Tit. 1, 
Auto 5. 

? Novis. Recop., Lib. 11, Tit. vii, ley 5. 

3 Autos Acordados, Lib. 1v, Tit. 1, Gloss 1. - 

‘ Novis. Recop., Lib. rv, Tit. 1, ley 18. 

® Archivo de Simancas, Gracia y Justicia, Leg. 621, fol. 82; Inquisicion, Leg. 
1465, fol. 50.—Llorente, Hist. erft., Cap. xxv1, Art. ii, n. 3. 


Cuap. IV] PROTRACTED DELAYS. 525° 


Of these evils the one most keenly felt was the interminable delay 
in the settlement of cases. The councils from which the members. 
were drawn were crowded with their more legitimate business; 
there was rarely accord in the junta; the matter would be argued 
without expectation of agreement; each side would be obstinate; 
perhaps the case would be referred to the king or years would 
pass before a settlement would be reached; perhaps, indeed, it 
would be silently dropped without a decision, especially when 
a decision might be undesirable because one or both sides feared 
a troublesome precedent. Meanwhile the case remained petrified 
in the condition existing at the time the competencia was formed. 
Until the so-called Concordia of 1679 permitted the release of 
prisoners on bail, if any one had been arrested, he remained in 
prison, perhaps to die there as sometimes occurred. In 1638 
the Inquisition complained of this, when its officers happened 
to be the prisoners, for competencias were always slow of settle- 
ment and the work of the tribunals was crippled for lack of their 
ministers, while their poverty precluded their giving adequate 
salaries to substitutes.’ It was not until 1721 that a remedy for 
this procrastination was sought by Philip V in a decree reciting 
the long delays and the frequency of cases remaining undecided 
by reason of a dead-lock in the junta, wherefore in future when 
a junta was formed, he was to be notified in order that he might 
appoint a fifth member, thus assuring a majority.? It does not 
seem however that this accomplished its purpose and, when 
Carlos III consolidated the cumbrous framework of government 
by instituting the Junta de Estado, composed of the ministers 
of the several departments, Floridablanca enumerates, among 
the benefits accruing, the expediting of cases of competencia 
and avoiding the interminable delays caused by the etiquette of 
the tribunals and the intrigues of the parties concerned.* 


I have dwelt thus in detail on this subject, not only because it 
absorbed so large a portion of the activity of the Inquisition, but 
because of its importance in the relations between the Holy Office 
and the other institutions of Spain and in explaining the detes- 
tation which the Inquisition excited. If the people regarded it as 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 21, fol. 127. 

2 Autos Acordados, Lib. tv, Tit. 1, Auto 10.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, 
Leg. 1465, fol. 41. 

5 Floridablanca, Memorial 4 Carlos III (MS. penes me). 


526 CONFLICTING JURISDICTIONS [Boox II 


a whole with awe and veneration, as the bulwark of the Catholic 
faith, their hatred was none the less for its members, and the 
perpetual struggle against the tremendous odds of its power, 
supported by the unflinching favor of the Hapsburgs, bears 
equal testimony to the tenacity of the Spanish character and to 
the magnitude of the evils with which the Inquisition afflicted 
the nation. 


GHAP Pi Rey: 
POPULAR HOSTILITY 


THE preceding chapters. illustrate some of the causes that 
provoked popular hatred of the Inquisition, but these were by 
no means all. It enjoyed, as we have said, enthusiastic support 
in the exercise of its appropriate functions in defending the 
faith, but apart from this, it had infinite ways of exciting hostility. 
This was the inevitable result of entrusting irresponsible power 
to men, for the most part overbearing and arrogant, who owed 
obedience only to the Suprema and who early learned that, while 
it might disapprove of their acts, it always supported them against 
complaints and, while it might administer rebuke in secret, it 
hesitated long before it would compromise the asserted infalli- 
bility of the Holy Office by dismissal or any other public demon- 
stration. There was no other power to call them to account and 
they could rely upon its indulgence. This indulgence they ex- 
tended to their subordinates, over whom, indeed, they had not 
the power of removal, and the consequence was that the whole 
body thoroughly earned the detestation of the people by the abuse 
of their privileges, creating irritation which was none the less 
exasperating because its causes might be trivial. The situation 
finds expression in a carta acordada of October 12, 1561, in which 
the Suprema begs the tribunals, for the love of God, to inflict 
no wrong or oppression for, since they are accused when they do 
right, what is to be expected when they give just grounds of 
complaint?” 

Whether just or not, grounds of complaint were never lacking. 
The power of the inquisitor had practically scarce any bounds 
but his own discretion, and the temptation to its abuse was irre- 
sistible to the kind of men who mostly filled the position. In 
the memorial of Llerena to Philip and Juana, in 1506, complaint 
is made that the officials seized all the houses that they wanted 
and in one case, when some young orphan girls did not vacate 
as quickly as ordered, they fastened up the street-door and the 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Libro 939, fol. 64. 
( 527) 


528 POPULAR HOSTILITY [Boox II 


occupants were obliged to make an opening in order to leave it.’ 
The same spirit was shown to parties not quite so defenceless 
in 1642, when its exhibition in Cordova nearly provoked a disas- 
trous tumult. There was a vacant house which Juan de Ribera, 
one of the inquisitors, talked of renting, but he went to Murcia 
without taking it. On his return he found that it had been leased 
to a son of Don Pedro de Cardenas, one of the veinticuatros, or 
town-councillors. He sent for Cardenas and asked whether, he 
knew that he had engaged the house. Cardenas professed igno- 
rance, adding that, if he had not moved his family into it, he 
would abandon it. Ribera ordered him to leave it and, on his 
refusal, the tribunal took up the quarrel by serving on him a 
notice to quit. As he did not obey, it cited him to appear and 
forced him to give security. His kinsmen and friends rallied 
around him and promised to sustain him by force; the matter 
became town-talk and the tribunal felt its honor engaged to 
sustain its commands by violence. It assembled the two com- 
panies of soldiers which it kept in the alcdzar, while the caballeros 
armed themselves and guarded the house. The corregidor 
appealed to the tribunal not to drench the city in blood by 
exposing the poor civic militia to the swords of the gentlemen, 
and it consented to carry the matter to the king. The Council 
of Castile ordered that the tenant be maintained in possession, 
while the Suprema instructed the tribunal not to yield a jot, 
but to eject him by whatever means it could.2, What was the out- 
come does not appear, but the case illustrates the extent to which. 
the Inquisition magnified its powers and the determination with © 
which it employed them. 

It was impossible to prevent these lawless abuses. The Suprema 
might scold and threaten but, as it rarely punished and always. 
protected the offenders, its restraining efforts amounted to little. 
The visitadores, or inspectors, duly reported disorders, and 
instructions would be issued to reform them, but to these the 
inquisitors paid little respect. There is no reason to suppose that 
the Barcelona tribunal was worse than any other and a series of 
reports of visitations there gives us an insight into the evils 
inflicted on the people. In 1544, Doctor Alonso Pérez sent in a 
report in consequence of which the Suprema roundly rebuked 
all the subordinates, except the judge of confiscations. All but. 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Patronato Real, Inquisicion, Leg. tinico, fol. 44. 
? Cartas de Jesuitas (Mem. hist. espafiol, XVI, 366). 


Cuap. Vv] } ABUSES 529 


two were defamed for improper relations with women; all accepted 
presents; all made extra and illegal charges; all neglected their 
duties and most of them quarrelled with each other. The fiscal 
was especially objectionable for his improper conduct of prose- 
cutions and for appropriating articles belonging to the tribunal; 
he refused to pay his debts; he arrested a candle-maker for not 
furnishing candles as promptly as he demanded; when a certain 
party bought some sheep from a peasant and was dissatisfied 
with his bargain, the fiscal cited the peasant, asserted that the 
purchase money was his and forced the peasant to take back the 
sheep and return the money. Yet the Suprema was too tender 
of the honor of the Holy Office to dismiss a single one of the 
peccant officials. It ordered them to be severely reprimanded, 
a few debts to be paid and presents to be returned and uttered 
some vague threats of what it would do if they continued in their 
evil courses.’ 

The natural result of this indulgence appears in the next visita- 
tion by the Licenciado Vaca, in 1549. The same abuses were 
flourishing, with the addition that the inquisitor, Diego de Sar- 
miento, had accepted the position of commissioner of the Cru- 
zada indulgence and had appointed as its preachers and collectors 
the commissioners and familiars of the tribunal, to the great 
oppression and vexation of the people, whose dread of the Holy 
Office prevented complaints. Sarmiento was dismissed in 1550, 
but in 1552 he was reappointed to Barcelona; the fiscal and notary, 
who were specially inculpated, were suspended for six months 
and the gaoler, for ill-treatment of prisoners, was mulcted in one 
month’s wages.” In 1561 another visitation was made by Inquisi- 
tor Gaspar Cervantes, whose report was exceedingly severe on 
the disorders of the tribunal and drew from the Suprema an 
energetic demand for their reform.*® This produced no amendment, 
the tribunal went on undisturbed until the complaints of the 
Cértes of 1564 led to another and more searching investigation 
by de Soto Salazar, in 1566. There were not only abuses of all 
kinds in the trials of heresy but numerous cases in which, as the 
Suprema told them, they had no jurisdiction. Apparently they 
were ready to put their unlimited powers at the disposal of all 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Sala 40, Lib. 4, fol. 141-7. 
2 Tbidem, fol. 179, 182, 196-6, 199 201, 205, 212, 217. 
3 Ibidem, fol. 255-61; Visitas de Barcelona, Leg. 15, fol. 2. 

34 


530 POPULAR HOSTILITY [Boox II 


comers and imprisoned, fined and punished in the most arbitrary 
manner, gathering fees, commissions and doubtless bribes and 
selling injustice to all who wanted it, while the dread of their 
censures prevented opposition or remonstrance. In these cases, 
which were not of faith, the accused were often seized in the 
churches, where they had sought asylum, as though they were 
wanted for heresy and the repeated instances in which the Suprema 
orders their names stricken from the records points to one of the 
most cruel results of this reckless abuse of jurisdiction, for it 
inflicted on the sufferer, his kindred and posterity, an infamy 
unendurable to the Spaniard of the period. The long and detailed 
missive which the Suprema addressed to the tribunal, as the 
result of Salazar’s report, gives a most vivid inside view of 
the abuses naturally springing from unrestrained autocracy, 
which, by the absolute and impenetrable secrecy of its opera- 
tions, was relieved from all responsibility to its victims or to 
public opinion. The Suprema takes every official in turn, from 
inquisitors down to messengers, specifies their misdeeds and 
scores them mercilessly, showing that the whole organization 
was solely intent on making dishonest gains, on magnifying its 
privileges and on tyrannizing over the community, while the 
defence of the faith was the baldest pretext for the gratification 
of greed and evil passions. Yet all this was practically regarded 
as quite compatible with the duties of the Inquisition. The three 
inquisitors, Padilla, Zurita and Mexia, were suspended for three 
years and were then sent to repeat their misdeeds elsewhere and 
the two former were in addition fined ten ducats apiece.’ That 
an institution possessing these powers and exercising them in 
such fashion, should be regarded with terror and detestation was 
inevitable. We shall see hereafter how it shrouded all its acts 
in inviolable secrecy and how it rightly regarded this as one of 
the most important factors of its influence, and we can under- 
stand the mysterious dread which this inspired, while, at the 
same time, it released the inquisitor and his subordinates from 
the wholesome restraint of publicity. 


The smothered hostility thus excited was always ready for an 
explosion when opportunity offered to gratify it. In the desire 
to stimulate the breeding of horses, a royal pragmatica, in 1628, 
prohibited the use of mules for coaches. The inquisitors of 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Visitas de Barcelona, Leg. 15, fol. 20. 


Cuar. Vi ABUSES 531 


Logrofio, in the full confidence that no one would venture to 
interfere with them, persisted in driving with mules and when 
the corregidor, Don Francisco Bazan, remonstrated and threat- 
ened to seize a coach, they told him it would be his ruin. He did 
not venture, but, in 1633, he procured from the Council of Castile 
an order that no coaches should be used in Logrofio, under 
pretext that they damaged certain shops projecting on the 
principal street. The fiscal of the tribunal undertook to meet 
this by asserting that it had a special privilege from the king 
concerning coaches, but when Bazan promised to obey, it was not 
forthcoming. The Suprema took up the quarrel and represented 
to Philip IV the hardship inflicted on the inquisitors, too old and 
feeble for the saddle; the compassionate king endorsed on the 
consulta the customary formula of approval—‘I have so ordered” ; 
the Suprema then applied to the Council of Castile for a corre- 
sponding order and several communications passed without 
result. Another consulta was presented to the king, who endorsed 
it “I have so ordered again,” but the Council of Castile was still 
evasive. Then the Logrofio authorities offered to the Bishop 
of Calahorra permission to use coaches and intimated to the 
inquisitors that, if they would apply for a licence, it would be 
given. The Suprema forbade them thus to recognize the local 
magistracy, as they had royal authority, whereupon they resumed 
the use of their coaches; the aleuazil of the corregidor arrested 
one of their coachmen and they excommunicated the corregidor. 
The king, December 9, 1633, ordered him to be absolved, to 
which, on December 30th, the Suprema replied that he would 
be absolved if he made application. The Council of Castile 
presented to the king a consulta, arguing that ecclesiastics and 
inquisitors alike owed obedience to the laws and that the corregi- 
dor had acted with great moderation. February 5, 1634, the 
king enquired what had been done with the corregidor, but it 
was not until December 16th that the Suprema condescended to 
reply, complaining bitterly of the slight put upon the Inquisition, 
when the whole safety of the monarchy depended upon its labors. 
Finally, on February 15, 1635, the Council of Castile sent to the 
Suprema a licence for the use of coaches in Logrofio, at the same 
time intimating that its tax of media afiata had not been paid. 
In the course of the quarrel the Council presented a very forcible 
consulta to the king which exhibits the light in which the Inqui- 
sition was regarded by the highest authorities of the State. It 


532 POPULAR HOSTILITY [Boox II 


represented that everywhere the inquisitors and their officials, 
under color of privileges that they did not possess, were causing 
grave disorders. They were vexing and molesting the corregidors 
and other ministers of the king, oppressing them with violent 
methods and frightening them with threats of punishment in 
order to deter them from defending the royal jurisdiction. Thus 
crimes remained unpunished, justice became a mockery and the 
king’s vassals were afflicted with what they were made to suffer 
in their honor, their lives, their fortunes and their con- 
sciences.’ | 

Trivial quarrels such as this, developed until they distracted 
the attention of the king and his advisers, were constantly break- 
ing out and bear testimony to the antagonistic spirit which was 
all-pervading. A long-standing cause of dissension in Logrofio: 
may be taken as a type of what was occurring in many other 
places. Local officials there, as elsewhere, had a perquisite in 
the public carniceria, or shambles, of dividing among themselves 
the vientres or menudos—the chitterlings—of the beasts slaugh- 
tered. It was not unnatural that the inquisitors and their subor- 
dinates should seek to share in this, but the claim was grudgingly 
admitted, as it diminished the portions of the town officers, and 
it led to bickerings. In 1572 Logrofio complained to the Suprema. 
that, while it was willing to give to each inquisitor the menudo of 
a sheep every week, the inferior officials, down to the messengers, 
claimed the same and, when there was not enough to go round, 
they caused the slaughter of additional sheep, in order to get 
their perquisite. As the population was poor, living mostly on 
cow-beef, and meat would not keep in hot weather, this caused 
much waste, wherefore the town begged that during the four 
hot months the inferior officials should be content with what. 
the town officers received and during the other eight months it. 
would endeavor to give them more. To this the Suprema gra- 
ciously assented, but, in 1577, there was another outbreak, to quiet 
which the Suprema ordered the enforcement of the agreement. 
In 1584 trouble arose again and still more in 1593 and in 1601 
it reached a point at which the tribunal summoned all the staff 
of the carniceria and scolded them roundly, giving rise to great 
excitement. Then in 1620 there was a worse outbreak than ever, 
owing to the refusal of the regidor to give to one of the inquisitors: 


* MSS. of Royal Library of Copenhagen, 218», p, 125.—Archivo de Simancas, 
Inquisicion, Lib. 32, fol. 109, 117. 


Cuap. V] ABUSES 533 


two pairs of sheep’s stones asked for on the plea that he had 
guests to breakfast. The angry inquisitor, thus deprived of his 
breakfast relish, induced the tribunal to summon the regidor 
before it and severely reprimand him, thus not only inflicting 
a grave stigma on him, but insulting the town, of which it com- 
plained loudly to the Suprema.’ It is easy to understand how 
trifles of the kind kept up a perpetual irritation, of which only 
the exacerbations appear in the records. 

The privileges of the markets, in fact, were a source of endless 
troubles. It was recognized that both secular and ecclesiastical 
officials were entitled to the first choice and to be served first. 
Those of the Inquisition claimed the same privilege, not only in 
cities where there was a tribunal, but also where the scattered 
commissioners and notaries resided. That this was frequently 
resisted is shown by the formula of mandate to be used in such 
cases, addressed to the corregidor or alcaldes, setting forth that. 
the rights in this respect of the aggrieved party had not been 
respected and that in future he should have the first and best 
(after the secular and ecclesiastical officials had been served) 
of all provisions that he required, at current prices, and this 
under penalty of twenty thousand maravedfs, besides punish- 
ment to the full rigor of the law.? It does not appear that there 
really was any legislation entitling the Inquisition to this privi- 
lege, but in the frequent troubles arising from its assertion, the 
inquisitors acted with their customary truculence. A writer, in 
1609, who deprecates these quarrels, suggests as a cure that the 
king issue a decree that the representatives of the Inquisition 
shall have preference in purchasing and, at the same time, he tells 
of a case in Toledo where a regidor, who told the steward of the 
tribunal to take as many eggs as he wanted, but no more, was 
arrested and prosecuted, and of another in Cérdova, where a 
hidalgo, who had bought a shad and refused to give it up to an 
acquaintance of a servant of an inquisitor, was punished with two 
hundred lashes and sent to the galleys.2 In 1608 the Suprema 
issued an injunction that purveyors of inquisitors should take 
nothing by force, the significance of which lies rather in the 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion de Logrofio, Leg. 1, n. 21, 22; Inquisicion, 
Leg. 1157, fol. 90. 

2 Modo de Proceder, fol. 43 (Bibl. nacional, MSS., D, 122). 

3 Discurso en razon del acuerdo que se puede tomar entre las jurisdicciones 
(MSS. of Bodleian Library, Arch. Seld. A. Subt. 13; Arch. S, 130). 


534 POPULAR HOSTILITY [Boox II 


indication of existing abuses than in its promise of their removal.’ 
The claim of preference was pushed so far that in Seville, in 1705, 
there arose a serious trouble because the servant of an inquisitor 
detained boat-loads of fish coming to market, in order to make 
his selection, and it required a royal cédula of March 26, 1705, 
forbidding inquisitors to detain fish or other provisions on the 
way, or to designate by banderiilas the pieces selected for them- 
selves.2, When we consider the character of the slaves and servants 
thus clothed with authority to insult and browbeat whomsoever 
they chose, in the exercise of such functions, we can conceive 
the wrath and indignation stored up against their masters in the 
thousands of cases where fear prevented an explosion. It is true 
that the Suprema issued instructions that all purveyors should 
behave themselves modestly and give no ground of offence and 
that no one should be summoned or imprisoned for matters 
arising out of provisions, but as usual these orders were disre- 
garded. Insolence would naturally elicit a hasty rejoinder which, 
as reported by the servant to his master, would imply disrespect 
towards the Holy Office, and severe punishment would be justified 
on that account. 


Perhaps less irritating but more serious in its effects was the 
use made of the fuero by those engaged in trade. Inquisitor- 
general Deza, in 1504, issued a stringent prohibition against any 
salaried official having an interest, direct or indirect, in any 
business. Daily experience, he said, showed how much oppro- 
brium and disturbance it brought upon the Inquisition, where- 
fore he decreed that it should, 7pso facto, deprive the offender of 
his position and subject him to a fine of twenty thousand mara- 
vedis; he should cease to be an official as soon as contravention 
occurred and the receiver, under pain of fifty ducats, should cut 
off his salary. All officials cognizant of such a case should notify 
the inquisitor-general within fifteen days, under pain of major 
excommunication, and this order was to be read in all tribunals 
in presence of the assembled officials.® 

The severity of this regulation indicates the recognized magni- 
tude of the evil, and its retention in the compilation of Instruc- 
tions shows that it was considered as remaining in force. Like 


1 MSS. of Royal Library of Copenhagen, 218b, p. 201. 
? Archivo de Sevilla, Seccion primera, Carpeta X, n. 213 (Sevilla, 1860). 
* Arguello, fol. 23.—MSS. of Royal Library of Copenhagen, 218», p. 221. 


Cuap. V] OFFICIALS AS TRADERS 536 


all other salutary rules, however, it was slackly enforced from 
the first, and the Catalans took care to have the prohibition 
embodied in the bull Pastoralis officiz. It gradually became 
obsolete. A royal decree of August 9, 1725, in exempting from 
taxation the salaries of officials of the tribunal of Saragossa, 
adds that, if they possess property or are in trade, those assets 
are taxable, showing that their ability to trade was recognized. 
How aggravating was the advantage which they thus enjoyed 
can be gathered from a Valencia case of about 1750. Joseph 
Segarra, the contador of the tribunal, entered into partnership 
with Joseph Miralles, a carpenter, to bring timber from the 
Sierra de Cuenca. In the settlement Segarra claimed from 
Miralles a balance of 1779 libras; they entered into a formal 
agreement to accept the arbitration of Doctor Boyl, but Segarra 
rejected the award and Miralles sought to enforce it in the royal 
court. Then the tribunal intervened, asserting the award to be 
invalid because Segarra could not divest the Inquisition of its 
jurisdiction and it refused the request of the regent for a con- 
ference and a competencia.? Evidently it was dangerous to have 
dealings with officials; they always had a winning card up the 
sleeve, to be played when needed. 

As regards the great army of familiars, it was of course impos- 
sible to prevent them from trading. In fact traders eagerly 
sought the position in view of the advantages it offered of having 
the Inquisition at their backs, whether to escape payment of © 
debts or to collect claims or to evade customs dues, or in many 
other ways, not recognized by the Concordias but allowed by 
the tribunals. The Suprema occasionally warned the inquisi- 
tors not to appoint men of low class, such as butchers, pastry- 
cooks, shoemakers and the like, or traders whose object was protec- 
tion in their business,’® but no attention was paid to this; a large 
‘portion of the familiars was of this class, and the space occupied 
in the formularies by forms of levy and execution and sale and 
other similar matters shows how much business was brought to 
the tribunals by the collection of their claims.* The opportunities 
thus afforded for fraudulent dealings, for evading obligations and 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, J.ibro 27, fol. 88. 

2 Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 1, n. 3. fol. 16. 

3 Ibidem, Leg. 5, n. 2, fol. 157, 158.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 
940, fol. 172. 

4 Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Toledo, Leg. 498. 


536 POPULAR HOSTILITY [Boox II 


for enforcing unjust demands were assuredly not neglected and 
may be reckoned among the sources of the animosity felt for 
everyone connected with the Holy Office. 

In the remarkable paper presented, in 1623, to the Suprema 
by one of its members, many of the abuses of the Inquisition 
are attributed to the indifferent character and poverty of the 
officials. It would be well, the writer says, to appoint none but 
clerics, holding preferment to support themselves and unen- 
cumbered with wife and children. They would not, when dying, 
leave penniless families, which obliges the inquisitor-general to 
give to the children their fathers’ offices, thus bringing into the 
tribunals men who cannot even read; an increase of salaries, 
also, would relieve them of the necessity of taking bribes under 
cover of fees, and thus would put a stop to the popular murmurs 
against them. The inquisitors moreover should have power of 
removal, subject to confirmation by the Suprema, for now their 
hands are tied; their subordinates are unruly and uncontrollable. 
The greatest injury to the reputation of the Holy Office arises 
from its bad officials, who recognize no responsibility. No one 
should be appointed to office, or as a familiar, who is a tailor, 
carpenter, mason or other mechanic; it is these people who cause 
quarrels with the secular authorities, for they have little to lose 
and claim to be inviolable. In short, if we may believe the writer, 
the whole body of the tribunals, except the inquisitors, was rotten; 
none of the officials, from the fiscals down, were to be trusted, 
for all were eagerly in pursuit of dishonest gains, robbing the 
Inquisition itself and all who came in contact with it, and to this 
he attributed its loss of public respect and confidence.! 

Matters did not improve, for the Suprema always defended the 
tribunals from all complaints, and its tenderness towards delin- 
quents assured them of virtual impunity. At length, as we have 
seen, in 1703, Philip V made an attempt at reform. It was 
probably owing to this pressure that, in 1705, the Suprema 
issued a carta acordada prohibiting a number of special abuses 
and pointing out that, in regard to the proprieties of life, neither 
inquisitors nor officials obeyed the Instructions, consorting with 
improper persons and intervening in matters wholly foreign to 
their duties, thus rendering odious the jurisdiction of the Holy 
Office.” From various incidents alluded to above it is evident 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 926, fol. 15-26. 
? Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 10, n. 2, fol. 178. 


Cuap. V] COMPLAINTS OF FEUDALISM 537 


that this produced little amendment but, when the vacillation 
of Philip V was succeeded by the resolute purpose of Cailos III 
and his able ministers, the power of the Inquisition to oppress 
was greatly curbed. 


It was not alone the commonalty that had reason to complain 
of the extended jurisdiction claimed by the Inquisition. The 
feudal nobles, whose rights were already curtailed by the growth 
of the royal power, were restive under the interjection of this 
new and superior jurisdiction, which recognized no limitations 
or boundaries and interfered with their supremacy within their 
domains. Thus in 1553, the Duke of Najera complained that, 
in his town of Navarrete, the commissioner of the Inquisition 
had insulted his alcalde mayor and then, with some familiars, 
had forcibly taken wheat from his alguazil. Inquisitor-general 
Valdés wrote to the tribunal of Calahorra to investigate the 
matter and punish the officials if found in fault; the alcalde and 
alguazil were not to be prosecuted save for matters pertaining 
to the Inquisition and this not only in view of its proper adminis- 
tration but because he desired to gratify the duke." 

A still more serious cause of complaint, to which the nobles 
were fully alive, was the release of their vassals from jurisdiction 
by appointment to office. In 1549, the Countess of Nieva ap- 
pealed,to Valdés, setting forth that Arnedo was a place belonging 
to the count; it was within three leagues of Calahorra and there 
had never been a familiar there until recently Inquisitor Valdeo- 
livas had appointed some peasants in order to enfranchise them 
from the jurisdiction of their lord. It was not just that, while 
the count was absent from the kingdom on the king’s service, 
his peasants should be thus honored in order that they might 
create disturbance in the villages and interfere with the feudal 
jurisdiction.” It may well be doubted whether her request for 
the revocation of the commissions was granted, but that her 
prevision of trouble was justified is seen in a case before the 
tribunal of Barcelona, in 1577, in which Don Pedro de Queral, 
lord of Santa Coloma, a powerful noble of Tarragona, endeavored 
to secure the punishment of two of his vassals, Juan Requesens, 
a miller, and his cousin Vicente. They were both familiars and 
seem to have been the leaders of a discontented opposition which 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Sala 40, Lib. 4, fol. 215. 
2 Tbidem, fol. 180. 


538 POPULAR HOSTILITY [Boox II 


rendered Don Pedro’s life miserable. The trees in his plantations 
were cut down, his arms, over the door of his bayle in Santa 
Coloma, were removed and defaced, libellous coplas against him 
were scattered around the streets, but the cousins, being famil- 
iars, were safe from his wrath. Don Pedro died but the trouble 
continued between his widow, the Countess of Queral and a new 
generation of Requesens, who succeeded to their fathers’ office 
of familiars. Finally, in 1608, she succeeded in convicting Juan 
Requesens of malicious mischief, but her only satisfaction was 
that he was reprimanded, warned and sentenced to pay the costs, 
amounting to 1154 reales... Such a case shows how feudalism 
was undermined and we can conceive how nobles must have 
writhed under the novel experience of rebellious vassals clothed 
with inviolability. 

It is easy therefore to understand the detestation felt for the 
Inquisition by all classes—laymen and ecclesiastics, noble and 
simple. It was fully aware of this and constantly alleged it to 
the king when defending the tribunals in their quarrels, and when 
urging enlarged privileges as a protection against the hatred 
which it had excited. In its appeals against the curtailment of 
its jurisdiction in Aragon, it did not hesitate to admit that it 
had been hated there from the beginning and that its officials 
were so abhorred that they would not be safe if exposed to 
secular justice and, even as late as 1727, it repeated the assertion 
of the persistent hostility of the Aragonese.” In Logrofio, the 
inquisitors reported to the Suprema, in 1584, that it was a 
common saying among the people that their life consisted in 
discord with the tribunal and that it was death to them when 
there was peace.® It was the same in Castile. The Cortes, in 
1566, when encouraging Philip II to constrain the Flemings to 
admit the Inquisition, gave as a reason that his success there was 
necessary to the peaceful maintenance of the institution in Spain, 
thus intimating that, if the Flemings rejected it, the Castilians 
would seek to follow their example.* In the same year the famil- 
iars alleged that the detestation in which they were held led them 
to be singled out for especial oppression in the billeting of troops 


1 Proceso contra Juan Requesens (MSS. of Am. Philos. Society). 

? Bibl. nacional, MSS., Mm, 464.—Archivo gén. de la C. de Aragon, Leg. 528. 
—Archivo de Simancas, Lib. 27, fol. 88. 

* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Leg. 1157, fol. 90. 

* Dépéches de M. de Fourquevaux, I, 166 (Paris, 1896). 


Cuap. Vi] PERSISTENT ANTAGONISM 539 


and, in 1647, the Suprema declared that nothing seemed sufficient 
to repress the hatred with which they were regarded, in support 
of which it instanced an unjust apportionment, in Cuenca, of 
an assessment of a forced loan.* This hostility continued to the 
last, even though the decadence of the Inquisition in the eigh- 
teenth century diminished so greatly its powers of oppression. 
A defender of the institution, in 1803, commences by deprecating 
the hatred which had pursued it from the beginning; even in the 
_ present age, he says, of greater enlightenment, there is crass 
ignorance of its essential principles and a mortal opposition to 
its existence. 


Thus, notwithstanding the Spanish abhorrence of Jews and 
heretics, the dread which the Inquisition inspired was largely 
mingled with detestation, arising from its abuse of its privileges 
in matters wholly apart from its functions as the guardian of 
the faith. 


1 Modo de Proceder, fol. 41-2 (Bibl. nacional, MSS., D, 122).—Archivo de 
Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 23, fol. 45, 57. 

2 Discurso historico-legal sobre el Origen, Progresos y Utilidad del Santo Oficio, 
Introd. pp. i-iv, p. 139 (Valladolid, 1803) 


APPENDIX. 


ji 
LIST OF TRIBUNALS. 


THE permanent tribunals of the Spanish Inquisition were Toledo, 
Seville, Valladolid, Corte (Madrid), Granada, Cordova, Murcia, Llerena, 
Cuenca, Santiago (Galicia), Logrofio and Canaries, under the crown 
of Castile, and Saragossa, Valencia, Barcelona and Majorca under 
the crown of Aragon. In addition were Sicily, Sardinia, Mexico, Lima 
and Cartagena de las Indias, which lie beyond the scope of the present 
work. 

This distribution of the forces of the Inquisition was not reached 
until experience had shown the most effective centres of action. 
Numerous more or less temporary tribunals were erected and many 
changes occurred in the apportionment of territory. The following 
list makes no pretension to absolute completeness but contains the 
result of such allusions as I have met in the documents. 


ALCARAZ. For some years there was a tribunal fixed at Alcaraz. 
In 1495 Alonso Hernandez, presented for a canonry, is qualified as 
Inquisitor of Alcaraz and, in 1499, Alonso de Torres is appointed as 
inquisitor there.’ 


Army AND Navy. The fleet organized for the Catholic League which 
won at Lepanto seemed to require a tribunal to preserve it from heresy 
and Philip II procured from Pius V a brief of July 23, 1571, authorizing 
the inquisitor-general to appoint an inquisitor for each army of Philip 
II, whether by land or sea.” The first appointment under this seems 
to have been Rodrigo de Mendoza, Inquisitor of Barcelona, whose 
commission as Inquisidor de las Galeras is dated March 21, 1575, 


1 Bibl. nacional, MSS., Tj, 28.—Llorente, Afiales, I, 252. 
? Archivo de Alealé, Hacienda, Leg. 1049. 
(541 ) 


542 APPENDIX 


together with one for his notary, Domingo de Leon, and instructions 
as to his duties." He was succeeded by Gerénimo Manrique, who cele- 
brated an auto de fein Messina. After him was Doctor Juan Bautista 
de Cardona, but merely as commissioner, who served for two years, 
when Pdramo, writing in 1598, tells us that the fleets were scattered 
and the office ceased to exist.” If so, it was 1evived for, in 1622, we are 
told that Fray Martin de Vivanco, chaplain of the galleys of Sicily, 
was appointed Jnquisidor del Mar and, in 1682, it is stated that when 
a Principe del Mar was appointed he took with him an inquisitor and 
officials and all prisoners arrested by them were delivered to the nearest 
tribunal when the galleys made port.® 

In later times the inquisitor-general was “Vicario géneral de los 
Reales Ejercitos de Mar y Tierra” and as such appointed sub-delegates 
to accompany the army, with the necessary powers. The jurisdaccion 
castrense enjoyed by military men did not exempt them in matters of 
faith from the Inquisition, but the subdelegados castrenses seem to have 
possessed no judicial powers, and debate arose, in 1793 and again in 
1806, whether they or the episcopal Ordinaries should be called in to 
vote with the inquisitors in the cases of soldiers.’ 


Avita. When Torquemada built his convent of San Tomas in Avila 
he provided accommodations for an Inquisition and, in 1590, the 
prisoners accused of the murder of the Santo Nifio de la Guardia were 
transferred thither from the tribunal of Segovia for trial. It continued 
to exist for some years and had connection with Segovia, for, June 9, 
1499, Francisco Gonzalez of Fresneda and Juan de Monasterio were 
appointed inquisitors of Avila and Segovia, residing sometimes in one 
city and sometimes in the other.° 


BaLaGuER. There were autos de fe celebrated in Balaguer, August 
15, 1490 and June 10, 1493, but these were held by the inquisitors of 
Barcelona as they did in Tarragona, Gerona, Perpignan and other 
places in their district. In 1517, however, there would seem to be a 
tribunal there for a letter of the Suprema relates to the murder of the 
assessor of the Inquisition of Balaguer. If so, it was probably with- 
drawn in consequence for, in 1518, the inquisitors of Barcelona are 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 940, fol. 58. 

? Pdéramo, pp. 224-6. 

’ Franchina, Breve Rapporto della Inquisizione di Sicilia, p. 98 —Juan Gémez 
de Mora, Relacion del Auto de Fe celebrado en Madrid, este afio de 1632 (Madrid, 
1632). 

* Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 4, n. 3, fol 70; Leg. 17, 
n. 3, fol. 5. 

® Boletin, XV, 333-45; XXIII, 415-16.—Llorente, Afiales, I, 253. 


TRIBUNALS 543 


ordered to publish edicts against those who molest the clergy of Bala- 
guer for observing the interdict cast upon the town.! 


BARBASTRO. As early as 1488 there was a tribunal with inquisitors 
at Barbastro, but, in 1521, it was suppressed and incorporated with 
Saragossa.’ 


BaRcELONA. Established in 1486. It claimed jurisdiction over the 
free Republic of Andorra, which was included by Arevalo de Zuazo 
in his visitation of 1595. Long after Roussillon and Cerdagne had 
been retroceded to France, the Barcelona inquisitors in 1695 still 
styled themselves “‘Inquisidores Apostédlicos . . . en el Prin- 
cipado de Catalufia y su partido, con los Condados de Rosellon y Cer- 
dafia y los Valls de Aran y Andorra.’’® See L&ripa, TARRAGONA, 
Tortosa, BALAGUER. 


Bureos. There was originally a tribunal in Burgos but, in the 
redistricting by Ximenes it was included in Valladolid. In 1605, 
Philip II transferred the tribunal to Burgos, with orders to the 
inquisitors to eject any occupants of buildings that they might find 
suited to their purposes. In 1622 it was still rendering yearly reports 
of cases to the Suprema but, probably about 1630, it returned to 
Valladolid. When, in 1706, Madrid was captured by the Allies under 
Galloway and Las Minas, the court fled to Burgos, carrying the Inqui- 
sition thither, but its stay was short and it soon returned to the capital.* 


Capiz. See XNERES. 


CALAHORRA. A ‘tribunal was established here as early as 1493, 
when it celebrated an auto at Logrofio. In 1499 it alternated between 
Calahorra and Durango. In the redistricting by Ximenes in 1509 it 
was incorporated with Durango, but was soon re-established. Cédulas 
of 1516, 1517, and 1520 indicate that at this time it was the tribunal 
of the enormous district of Valladolid, but in 1522 the Inquisition of 
Navarre was extended over Calahorra; then Navarre and Calahorra 
were separated, but in 1540 there was a redistribution, and Navarre 
and the Basque Provinces were added to Calahorra. In 1560 a part 


1 Carbonell de Gestis Hereticor. (Coll. de Doc. de la C. de Aragon, X XVIII, 
137, 139).—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 72, P. 1, fol. 61; P. m1, fol. 72, 
110. 

2 Bibl. nacionale de France, fonds espafiol, 80, fol. 44.—Llorente, Afiales II, 
242. 

8’ Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Visitas de Barcelona, Leg. 15, fol. 4.— 
Proceso contra Estevan Ramoneda, fol. 72 (MSS. of Am. Philos. Society). 

_* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 1; Leg. 1465, fol. 32; Lib. 56, fol. 605, 
Llorente, Afiales, 11, 5. 


544 APPENDIX 


of the territory of Burgos was set off from Valladolid and added to 
Calahorra and, in 1570, the seat of the tribunal was definitely moved 
to Logrofio, q. v.’ 


CaLATAYUD. Calatayud was the seat of an intermittent tribunal at 
least from the year 1488 for, in 1502, Ferdinand speaks of Joan de 
Aguaviva who for fourteen years had served it as barber-surgeon 
whenever it resided in Calatayud and one of the first presentations to 
a prebend, in 1488, was Martin Marquez, described as fiscal of the 
Inquisition of Calatayud. A letter of the Suprema, Jan. 22, 1519, 
addressed to the “‘Inquisitor of Calatayud” shows that it was still in 
existence, but it must soon afterwards have been merged into Sara- 
gossa.” 


CANARIES. The zeal of Diego de Muros, Bishop of Canaries, did not 
wait for the extension of the Spanish Inquisition over his diocese, but 
led him to establish an episcopal one by proclamation of April 28, 1499. 
It was not until 1504 that Inquisitor-general Deza sent Bartolomé 
Lépez de Tribaldos thither to establish a tribunal at Las Palmas, which 
seems to have commenced business Oct. 28, 1505. It continued thus 
to the end.® 


CARTAGENA. See MURCIA. 


) 


Crupap Reau. A letter of Ferdinand, Nov. 8, 1483, announces the 
appointment of Licenciados Costana and de Balthasar as inquisitors 
for Ciudad Real. May 10, 1485, Ferdinand announces the transfer of 
Costana to Toledo, to which place the tribunal was removed.‘ 


Coérpova. A tribunal was established in Cordova as early as 1482, 
at the instance of its bishop, the New Christian Alonso de Burgos. Its. 
district comprised the bishoprics of Cérdova and Jaen, the Abadia de 
Alcala la Real, the Adelantamiento of Cazorla, with Ecija and Estepa, 
to which Granada was added after the conquest.® See GRANADA and 
JAEN, 


1 Llorente, Afiales, I, 218, 252; II, 3—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 
4, fol. 1, 7, 104, 159, 162; Lib. 5, fol. 24; Lib. 73, fol. 211; Lib. 76, fol. 51, 53; 
Lib. 78, fol. 216, 258; Lib. 79, fol. 17, 226; Lib. 80, fol. 1. 

? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 2, fol. 8; Lib. 74, fol. 120.—Informe 
de Quesada (Bibl. nacional, MSS., Tj, 28). 

3 W. de Gray Birch, Catalogue of MSS. of the Inquisition in the Canary Islands, 
I, xvi, 5, 6 (London, 1903). 

* Archivo de Simancas, Inquisition, Lib. 939, fol. 62. 

* Matute y Luquin, Autos de Fe de Cérdova, pp. 1, 75. 


TRIBUNALS BAD 


Corte. The tribunal of Madrid was technically known as Corte. 
Madrid, originally a town of no special importance, belonged to the 
province of Toledo and was naturally under the jurisdiction of its 
tribunal. As the royal residence under Philip II and eventually the 
capital of the kingdom (except during the brief transfer to Valladolid, 
1600-1606) it furnished a large part of the business of Toledo. Toledan 
inquisitors came there to make investigations and even to try cases, 
of which we have examples in 1590 and 1592. Something more than 
this was felt to be needed and the Suprema adopted the plan of calling 
-inquisitors from other places to commence prosecutions and act under 
its instructions, of which the Licenciado Flores, Inquisitor of Murcia, in. 
1593, and Cifontes de Loarte, Inquisitor of Granada, in 1615, are exam- 
ples.” The presence of the inquisitor-general who did not hesitate to 
take action in emergencies, and that of an experienced commissioner, 
together with the frequent sojourn of one of the Toledo inquisitors: 
enabled speedy action to be taken when requisite, as occurred in 1621 
and again in 1624 and seemed to render superfluous the organization. 
of a special tribunal.’ 

Yet the want of it was felt, especially with the influx of Portuguese 
New Christians who multiplied in the capital. As the pressure increased 
Toledo furnished two assistant inquisitors to reside in Madrid, thus. 
establishing a kind of subordinate court, but in 1637 it was reported. 
that the establishment of a tribunal was positively resolved upon, with 
the added comment that this would sorely vex the Toledans.* To 
their natural opposition is doubtless to be attributed the postponement: 
of what, to a Spaniard of the period, would seem a necessity to the 
capital. It cannot have been long after this that one was organized 
for, in the matter of the confiscation of Juan Cote, commenced in 
Toledo, we find it, September 10, 1640, sitting in Madrid, with Fran- 
cisco Salgado and Juan Adam de la Parra as inquisitors. In the same 
year they suggested that the case of Benito de Valdepefias, on which 
they were engaged, should be sent to Toledo as more convenient for the 
witnesses, which was accordingly done.’ Toledan influence is doubtless. 
responsible for the action of Arce y Reynoso, soon after his accession in 
1643, in suppressing the new tribunal and restoring the business to 


1 MSS. of Library of Univ. of Halle, Yc, 20, Tom. III.—Archivo hist. nacional,. 
Inquisicion de Toledo, Leg. 113, n. 6. 

2 MSS. of Royal Library of Copenhagen, 218, p. 206.—MSS. of Library of 
Univ. of Halle, Yc, 20, T. VII. 

8 MSS. of Library of Univ. of Halle, Yc, 20, Tom. VI, X. 

4 Rodriguez de Villa, La Corte y Monarquia de Espafia, p. 47.—Cartas de 
Jesuitas (Mem. hist. espafiol, XIV, 6). 

5 MSS. of Library of Univ. of Halle, Yc, 20, Tom. IX, VI. 

35 


5046 APPENDIX 


Toledo.* The pressure, however, became too great and Arce y Rey- 
noso was obliged to reverse his action. The date of the re-establish- 
ment may safely be assumed as 1650, for a list of penitents, reconciled 
by Corte from the beginning, starts with three in 1651 and their trials 
can scarce have been commenced later than 1650.” Yet the relations 
between Toledo and Madrid continued intimate; in 1657, Lorenzo de 
Sotomayor styles himself as ‘‘ Inquisidor Apostdlico de la Inquisicion 
de la Ciudad y Reyno de Toledo y asistente de Corte;” to the end of 
the century the former always alluded to Corte as a despacho or office 
and not as a tribunal, and Corte seems to have sent its convicts to 
Toledo for their sentences to be published in the autos de fe.’ Its 
jurisdiction was strictly limited to the city, while the surrounding 
country remained with Toledo. In some respects its organization was 
peculiar. About 1750 we are informed that its inquisitors were drawn 
from other tribunals who continued them on their pay-rolls, their 
places being taken by appointees who served without salary until a 
vacancy occurred. Selection to serve in Corte was regarded as a pro- 
motion, leading to a place in the Suprema or to a bishopric, although 
the incumbent drew only the salary from his former tribunal with a 
Christmas propina of a hundred ducats. It had no receiver; the 
Suprema paid its expenses and presumably collected its fines and con- 
fiscations.* 


CureNcA. Murcia and Cuenca were originally under one tribunal. 
Some trouble apparently arose, possibly connected with the episcopal 
Ordinaries, for Ximenes ordered, January 22, 1512, that cases originat- 
ing in Murcia should be taken to Cuenca to be voted on and vice versa. 
Llorente says that in 1513 they were separated and Cuenca formed an 
independent tribunal, but documents as late as 1519 show them still 
connected, until, in 1520, we find Cuenca celebrating an auto. A letter 
of March 7, 1522, states that the pope has given to Cuenca the see of 
Sigiienza, without taking it from Toledo, because Toledo has never 
visited it although ordered to do so, and is not to do so in future. 
Then, May 31, 1533, the Suprema says that Toledo can exercise juris- 
diction there without giving Cuenca cause of complaint, and, in 1560, 
Sigiienza was restored to Toledo, yet in 1584 we find Cuenca exercising 
jurisdiction as far north as Soria. There would seem to have been 
some connection maintained between Murcia and Cuenca for, in 1746, 


1 Bibl. nacional, MSS., D, 118, fol. 146, n. 49. 

2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 1024, fol. 28. 

3 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Leg. 1474, fol. 67.—Archivo hist. nacional, 
Inquisicion de Toledo, Leg. 1. 

* Archivo de Alcal4, Estado, Leg. 2843.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, 
Leg. 1474, fol. 15. 


TRIBUNALS 547 


the former, in enumerating its personnel, specifies nine calificadores in 
Murcia and four in Cuenca.’ 


Daroca. There would appear to have been for a time a tribunal 
in Daroca for, in the accounts of Juan Royz, receiver of Aragon, for 
1498 there is an item of expenditure on the prison of the Inquisition 
there, which was duly passed.’ 


DuraNnGco. See CaLAHoRRA. As defined by Ximenes, in 1509, 
Durango had jurisdiction over Biscay, Guiptizcoa, Alava and Cala- 
horra, with some neighboring districts.° 


ESTELLA. See NAVARRE. 


GauiciA, also known as Santraco. The earliest allusion to this 
tribunal occurs in a commission issued at Corufia, May 20, 1520, to 
Doctor Gonzalo Maldonado as Inquisitor of Santiago. It was prob- 
ably some time before the tribunal was in working order but in 1527 it 
had caused sufficient alarm for the Suprema to write to Jo&o III of 
Portugal asking for the arrest and surrender of those who had fled from 
it and, in the same year, a warrant for three hundred ducats was drawn 
to be distributed among the inquisitors and officials of the Inquisition 
of Galicia. This was followed by a similar payment in 1528, showing 
that the tribunal was not self-sustaining.* Apparently the harvest 
was scanty and the tribunal was allowed to lapse, until the scare about 
Protestantism called attention to the ports of the North-west as afford- 
ing ingress to heretics and their books, for we hear nothing more about 
it until 1562, when Philip II, in letters of June 2nd and 26th informs 
the governor and officials of Galicia that Valdés had despatched Dr. 
Quixano there as inquisitor; they are no longer to prosecute cases of 
heresy as they have been doing but are to lend him all aid and favor 
and are to allow him to dispose as he pleases of the seats in his public 
functions, without disputes as to precedence. In 1566 we hear of Bar- 
tolomé de Leon as receiver there, which would indicate that it was at 
work and was making collections.’ Still, it had a strugele for exist- 
ence, for it was discontinued early in 1568, but it was re-established 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 3, fol. 84, 440, 445, 454; Lib. 4, 
fol. 9; Lib. 933; Lib. 939, fol. 63, 139; Lib. 9, fol. 29; Leg. 1157, fol. 144; Inquisi- 
cion de Corte, Leg. 359, fol. 3—Llorente, Afiales, II, 3. 

? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 1. 

3 Llorente, Afiales, II, 4. 

4 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 940, fol. 38, 39, 53; Lib. 76, fol. 74. 

5 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 930, fol. 127; Lib. 926, fol. 141; Lib. 
940, fol. 101.—Cf. Novis. Recop. Lib. 11, Tit. vii, ley 1, nota 9. 


548 APPENDIX 


within a few years, if Llorente is correct in saying that its first auto de 
fe was celebrated in 1573. A letter of Dr. Alva, its inquisitor, October 
31, 1577, speaks of having, in the previous year, sentenced Guillaume 
le Meunier, he being the only inquisitor, with the advice of a single 
consultor, showing that the tribunal was sparingly equipped.’ In later 
years it became one of the active tribunals of the kingdom. Its dis- 
trict comprised Coruna, Pontevedro, Orense and Lugo. 


GRANADA. Granada, after its capture, was included in the inquisi- 
torial district of Cérdova until, in 1526, the tribunal of Jaen was trans- 
ferred thither.’ 


GUADALUPE. A temporary tribunal was organized here in 1485 
which during its brief existence was exceedingly efficient (see p. 171). 


Huesca. See LERIDA. 


Jaca. A tribunal apparently existed here, which was annexed to 
Saragossa in 1521.° 


JAEN. A tribunal must have been established here about 1483, for 
two of its inquisitors took part in the assembly of Seville which framed 
the Instructions of 1484. It seems to have been discontinued, for Sep- 
tember 2, 1501, Ferdinand ordered a certain Dofia Beatriz of Jaen to 
abandon her house to the inquisitors sent thither, and to seek other 
quarters until they should finish the business that took them there. 
This indicates that only a temporary tribunal was intended but the sit- 
uation was conveniently central and it was one of those retained by 
Ximenes in his reorganization of 1509, when he assigned to it the dis- 
tricts of Jaen and Guadix, with Alcaraz, Cazorla and Beas. It was 
still in existence in 1525, as shown by a royal letter of that date, but. 
in 1526 it was suppressed and united with Cordova, the tribunal being 
transferred to Granada. In 1547, the official title of the tribunal was 
Cérdoba y Jaen. Rodrigo tells us that it was re-established inde- 
pendently in 1545, but this is evidently an error and the name does 
not reappear in subsequent lists of tribunals.‘ 


Leon. In 1501 we hear of “‘inquisitors of the province of Leon,” 
whose district cannot have been confined to that province, for Ferdi- 


1 Schafer, Beitrige, II, 76, 77—Llorente, Hist. crit. Cap. xtv1, Art. i, n. 11. 

? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 926, fol. 80. 

§ Llorente, Afiales, II, 242. 

* Arguello, fol. 1.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 1; Lib. 929, fol. 
297; Sala 40, Lib. 4, fol, 164.—Llorente, Afiales, II, 2—Rodrigo, Hist. verda- 
dera, II, 261.—Juan Gémez de Mora, Relacion del Auto de la Fe de 1632. 


TRIBUNALS 549 


nand, writing September 2nd to “Cousin Duke” tells him that they 
have occasion to go to his city of Coria (Extremadura) and asks that. 
they may occupy his house while there. In 1514, also there is. 
allusion to the receiver and alguazil of the Inquisition of Leon.’ 
Apparently the term is a synonym of the tribunal of Valladolid. 


Lripa. The provinces of Huesca in Aragon and Lérida and Urgel 
in Catalonia were united as an inquisitorial district at least as early as 
1490, when we hear of “‘the inquisitors of Huesca and Lérida” taking 
testimony. In 1498, a letter of Ferdinand, October 8th, announces the 
transfer of Urgel to Barcelona. Allusions to the tribunal continue to. 
occur in the correspondence of Ferdinand, who, in 1502, called away 
the inquisitor, as there was so little to do; Saragossa would attend to 
heresy and only the financial officials need be left. It was not discon- 
tinued however. In 1514, there was an attempt to murder the inquis- 
itor, Canon Antist, but in 1519 he is still addressed as inquisitor of 
Lérida. In this same year, however, Charles V, in a letter of Jan- 
uary 22nd, speaks of the tribunals of Huesca, Tarazona and Lérida 
having been united with that of Saragossa, and, when the people of 
Huesca complained, in the Cortes of Saragossa, of their citizens being 
carried away for trial, he ordered, under pain of a thousand florins, that 
no one should interfere with the jurisdiction of the Saragossa tribunal. 
October 9th an inspector reported that there was no need of a receiver 
or other officials there, whereupon they were all dismissed. In 1532, 
however, the inquisitors of Saragossa undertook to appoint a receiver 
for Lérida, but were told by the Suprema to cancel it as this was a 
function of the crown.’ 


LocrofNo. In 1570, as we have seen, the tribunal of Calahorra was 
shifted to Logrofio, which, in 1690, defines its territory as the whole 
kingdom of Navarre, the bishopric of Calahorra and la Calzada, Biscay, 
Guipuzcoa, Burgos along the mountains of Oca and the sea-coast as 
far as San Vicente de la Barquera, thus comprising the modern prov- 
inces of Navarre, Guipuzcoa, Biscay, Santander, Alava, Logrofio and 
a large part of Burgos.° 


LLERENA. Originally Extremadura and Leon were combined. In 
1500, Enrique Paez is receiver for the sees of Plasencia, Coria and 
Badajoz and the Province of Leon. In 1509 Ximenes assigned to 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 1; Lib. 3, fol. 381. 

2 Bibl. nationale de France, fonds espagnol, 80, fol. 24, 26.—Archivo de 
Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 1; Lib. 72, P. 1, fol. 2, 177, 198; Lib. 9, fol. 24, 68; 
Lib. 77, fol. 53. 

8 Archivo de Alcald, Hacienda, Leg. 498. 


550 APPENDIX 


Llerena as its district, Plasencia, Coria, Badajoz and the lands of the 
military Orders, but as late as 1516 it is spoken of as the Inquisition 
of Leon, Plasencia, Coria and Badajoz. Its original seat was Llerena 
but, in 1516, it was transferred to Plasencia and the receiver was 
ordered to sell the houses purchased at Llerena for the prison because 
others will be wanted for the purpose at Plasencia. It was migratory, 
however and, in 1520, the people of Ciudad Rodrigo, Coria and Merida 
were notified that it was about to leave Plasencia and wherever it went 
accommodations must be provided for lodgement, audience chamber 
and prisons. Finally it settled permanently at Llerena and, towards 
the close of the sixteenth century, Zapata speaks of it as the first 
tribunal of the kingdom, with the widest jurisdiction.’ 


Maprip. See Corte. 


MEDINA DEL Campo. The great importance of Medina del Campo as 
a centre of trade rendered inevitable its selection as the seat of a tri- 
bunal at an early period. In 1486 it was fully furnished with three 
inquisitors and an assessor, the Abbot of Medina serving as Ordinary. 
In 1516 we find it incorporated with Valladolid. When the court 
moved to Valladolid, the buildings of the Inquisition were wanted for 
its accommodation and the tribunal, in June 1601, was unceremoni- 
ously sent to Medina, where Dr. Martin de Bustos was turned out of 
his house to lodge it. Its stay was short, for in 1605, as we have seen, 
it was transferred to Burgos and there is no later trace of a tribunal at 
Medina.” 


Murcia, also known as CARTAGENA. See also CuENcA. Murcia was 
a seat of one of the early tribunals, comprising the sees of Murcia and 
Cartagena. Cuenca, which was attached to it in the redistribution by 
Ximenes in 1509, was separated about 1520. Oran, some time after 
its conquest by Ximenes, was placed under the jurisdiction of Murcia. 
The see of Orihuela, although belonging to Valencia, on its suppression 
about 1510, was united to that of Cartagena and thus fell under the 
tribunal of Murcia, where it remained after the restoration to episcopal 
honors in 1564.’ The tribunal of Orihuela naturally followed the same 
course on its suppression. 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 1; Lib. 3, fol. 447; Lib. 5, fol. 9, 27. 
—Llorente, Afiales, II, 3.—Miscelanea de Zapata (Mem. hist. espafiol, XI, 59). 

? Archivo de Simancas, Patronato Real, Inquisicion, Leg. tinico, fol. 28.— 
Archivo gén. de la C. de Aragon, Regist. 3684, fol. 94—Archivo de Simancas, 
Inquisicion, Lib. 4, fol. 1; Legajo 1465, fol. 31, 32.—Cabrera, Relaciones, p. 107. 

3 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 4, fol. 95, 96; Lib. 3, fol. 453.— 
Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 61.—Gams, Series Episco- 
porum, p. 55. 


TRIBUNALS | 551 


Navarre. After the conquest of Navarre, in 1512, a tribunal was 
established in Pampeluna, where it did not long remain. Then, for a 
short period it was transferred to Estella. In 1515 we find it in Tudela, 
where Ferdinand orders the Archdeacon of Almazan to visit it as it is 
in much need of reform and, soon afterwards, he asks for a delegation 
of episcopal power, as Tudela was only a deanery. It was quartered 
in the convent of San Francisco, to relieve which, in 1518, the Suprema 
ordered appropriate buildings to be obtained. In 1521 and 1522 there 
was talk of removing it to Pampeluna; then it was extended over Cala- 
horra; soon afterwards they were separated but finally, in 1540, they 
were united and so remained. Soon after the transfer to Logrofio we 
find the tribunal describing itself as ‘‘en todo el Reyno de Navarra, 


91 


Obispado de Calahorra y la Calzada y su distrito.” 
Navy. See Army. 


OrAN. Pdramo tells us that when Ximenes conquered Oran he 
commissioned Fray Yedra as inquisitor there. Llorente places this in 
1516 and calls the inquisitor Martin de Baydacar, Ximenes’s provisor. 
At that time, however, there could have been no tribunal there for, 
July 9, 1516 the Governor Lope Hurtado de Mendoza was ordered to 
discover and punish those who were impeding the sale of property for 
the Inquisition, work which would have been entrusted to the tribunal 
had there been one. By this time it had probably been suppressed and 
placed under Murcia.’ 


ORIHUELA. According to Llorente, Ferdinand, Aug. 7, 1507, united 
the tribunal of the bishopric of Orihuela to Valencia, which would infer 
its previous existence. It was reorganized in 1515, when Bishop 
Mercader appointed Pedro de los Rios as inquisitor and he was sent 
there with a staff of officials, and the magistrates were ordered to pro- 
vide quarters for ‘“‘el tiempo que fuere menester.”’ This indicates that 
the tribunal was not expected to be permanent and it was probably 
not long afterwards that it was united with Murcia, g. v.° 


Osuna. In 1488, among the presentations to prebends is one of 
Pedro Sanchez, qualified as Inquisitor of Osuna.* Such tribunal can 


1 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 3, fol. 316, 366; Lib. 72, P. 1, fol. 116; 
Lib. 73, fol. 142, 247, 248.—Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Toledo, Leg. 
498, 

? Péramo, p. 159.—Llorente, Afiales, II, 91—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisi- 
cion, Lib. 3, fol. 453. ; 

3 Llorente, Afiales, II, 5—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 3, fol. 332, 
333. 

4 Informe de Quesada (Bibl. nacional, MSS., Tj, 28). 


502 APPENDIX 


only have been short-lived and must speedily have been incorporated 
with that of Seville. 


PAMPELUNA. See NAVARRE. 


PERPIGNAN. August 9, 1495 an auto de fe was celebrated in Per- 
pignan, but it was held by the inquisitors of Barcelona. In 1518 there 
was only a commissioner there but, in 1524, there was a tribunal, with 
Juan Navardu as inquisitor and Antonio Saliteda as secretary. It was 
not permanent however. In 1566, when de Soto Salazar was sent on 
his visitation to Barcelona he was instructed to ascertain and report 
promptly details for the benefit of the inquisitor about to be sent to 
Perpignan to reside for the future and what officials should be pro- 
vided for him. It is doubtful whether this intention was carried out; 
in any event it was but transitory.’ 


PLASENCIA. See LLERENA. 
SANTIAGO. See GALICIA. 


Saracossa. Established in 1484, the tribunal gradually absorbed 
all the minor tribunals, but parted with Teruel to Valencia. See Bar- 
BASTRO, CALATAYUD, Daroca, JAcA, LERIDA, TARAZONA, TERUEL. 


Srcovia. Segovia claimed the honor of being among the earliest 
cities, after Seville, to possess a tribunal, but there was no representa- 
tive from there among the inquisitors assembled to frame the Instruc- 
tions of 1484, owing doubtless to the resistance of the bishop Juan 
Arias Davila.? One must have been established soon afterwards for, 
in 1490, the prisoners accused of the murder of the Santo Nifio de la 
Guardia were on trial there when Torquemada transferred them to 
Avila. (See Avia.) In the redistribution by Ximenes, in 1509, 
Segovia was incorporated with Valladolid, but, in 1544 and again in 
1599, the inquisitors of Toledo include it in their enumeration of their 
jurisdictions.* 


SIGUENZA. A tribunal was early established in Sigiienza which must 
have been busy if we may believe the statement that at an auto de fe 
in 1494 it relaxed a hundred and forty-nine victims to the secular arm. 


* Carbonell de Gestis Heret. (op. cit. XXVIII, 83).—Archivo de Simancas, 
Inquisicion, Lib. 72, P. 11, fol. 57, 59; Lib. 930, fol. 40; Lib. 13, fol. 372. 

? Bergenroth, Calendar of Spanish State Papers, I, xlv (London, 1862). 

* Colmenares, Historia de Segovia, Cap. xxxiv, 318.—Padre Fidel Fita(Boletin, 
XXIII, 415).—Llorente, Afiales, II, 3—Proceso contra Mari Naranja; Proceso 
contra Catalina Machado (MSS. penes me). 


TRIBUNALS 553 


In 1506, Deza dismissed the officials for the reason that it was about 
to be united with Toledo, a merger ratified by Ximines in 1509. Toledo 
neglected it and it was transferred to Cuenca, g.v. In the eighteenth 
century there would appear to be some kind of subordinate tribunal 
there, for about 1750, Saragossa, in a report of its personnel, states 
that one of its five inquisitors is assisting at Sigiienza.* 


TaRAzONA. A tribunal established here in the early period was 
merged into that of Saragossa in 1519.? 


TARRAGONA. When, in 1643, the inquisitors of Barcelona were 
ejected, they were, after some delay, sent to open their tribunal at 
Tarragona, where they remained until the suppression of the Catalan 
rebellion in 1652.° 


TERUEL. In 1485 a tribunal was established in Teruel after some 
resistance. At what time it was transferred to Valencia does not 
appear, but a cédula of October 2, 1502 is addressed to the inquisitors 
of Valencia residing in Teruel and Albarracin, showing that it was then 
subordinate to Valencia. In 1518 it was discontinued and the district 
was subjected to the direct jurisdiction of the Valencian tribunal, but 
Cardinal Adrian, by a provision of Nov. 21st of the same year, trans- 
ferred it to Saragossa and then, March 3, 1519 restored it to Valencia. 
This was felt by Aragon as a grievance and, at the Cértes of Monzon, 
in 1533 it asked that Teruel and Albarracin should be restored to the 
Saragossa tribunal, but the request was peremptorily refused and 
they remained subject to Valencia.’ 


Totepo. In 1485 the tribunal of Ciudad Real was transferred to 
Toledo. At first the limits of its district seem not to be clearly defined 
for, in 1489 the inquisitors were told to go to Guadalajara and Ferdi- 
nand ordered the local authorities to show them favor and allow them 
to make arrests. See CorTE, CUENCA, SEGOVIA, SIGUENZA, VALLA- 
DOLID for sundry changes in its district. In 1565 the official designation 
is the city and archbishopric of Toledo, the city and bishopric of 


1 Llorente, Afiales, I, 217, 317, II, 3.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion de 
Corte, Leg. 359, fol. 1. 

2 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 9, fol. 24; Lib. 926, fol. 141. 

8 Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 65, fol. 31, 50; Lib. 36, fol. 74.— 
Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Leg. 9, n. 2, fol. 323. 

* Archivo gén. de la C. de Aragon, Regist. 3684—Archivo de Simancas, 
Inquisicion, Lib. 2, fol. 16; Lib. 72, P. 11, fol. 40, 169; Lib. 74, fol. 133; Inquisicion 
de Barcelona, Cortes, Leg. 17, fol. 47, 48. 


554 APPENDIX 


Sigiienza and the bishoprics of Avila and Segovia, which Appa ay 
remained permanent, except the detachment of Madrid.’ 


Tortosa. For some reason the bishopric of Tortosa, although part 
of Catalonia, was subject to the tribunal of Valencia. When, in 1697, 
Vendéme captured Barcelona, the tribunal emigrated to Tortosa and 
established itself in the Colegio Imperial. Although peace was declared 
soon afterwards it remained in Tortosa at least until 1700 and pre- 
sumably stayed until the conclusion of the War of Succession, when it 
was reinstated in Barcelona in 1715.7 - 


TupELta. See NAVARRE. 


VALENCIA. The old Inquisition of Valencia was reorganized in 1484, 
and continued to the end. As seen above, it parted with Orihuela to 
Murcia, obtaining Teruel and Albarracin from Saragossa and Tortosa 
from Barcelona. 


VALLADOLID. A tribunal was assigned to Valladolid in 1485, but 
did not get into working order until 1488. After this it was suspended 
to be revived in 1499, as appears from a letter of Isabella, Dec. 24, 
1498. The northern provinces of Spain were comparatively free from 
heresy and Ximenes, in his reorganization of 1509, assigned to Valla- 
dolid the enormous district comprising the sees of Burgos, Osma, 
Palencia, Segovia, Avila, Salamanca, Zamora, Leon, Oviedo and 
Astorga and the abbeys of Valladolid, Medina del Campo and Sahagun. 
In 1516 the enumeration is the same except the omission of Zamora 
and the addition of Ciudad Rodrigo and Calahorra. Roughly speak- 
ing, it may be assumed to comprise the whole of the provinces of Old 
Castile, Leon and Asturias. Valdés, August 8, 1560, repeated April 12, 
1562 made over the whole of this to Toledo, but the grant can only 
have been temporary for, in 1565 the Toledan inquisitors described 
themselves as of the city and archbishoprics of Toledo, the city and 
bishopric of Sigiienza, with the bishoprics of Avila and Segovia, and in 
1579 we find the inquisitors of Valladolid styling themselves inquisitors 
of the kingdoms of Castile and Leon and the principality of Asturias. 
This enormous district it continued to retain, subject to the easternmost 
portion detached to Calahorra or Logrofio and to its translation in 1601 


? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 939, fol. 62.—MSS. of Library of 
Univ. of Halle, Yc, 20, Tom. VIII. 

? Proceso contra Ignacia ; contra Estevanillo F. (MSS. of Am. Philos. 
Society).—Archivo hist. nacional, Inquisicion de Valencia, Seccion Varios, Leg. 
13.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Sala 39, Leg. 4, fol. 23. 


TRIBUNALS BBB 


to Medina del Campo and thence to Burgos, from which it returned to 
Valladolid, probably about 1630." 


XerRES. In 1495, Rodrigo Lucero is described as Inquisitor of Xeres. 
In 1499 the sovereigns appointed Alonso de Guevara Inquisitor of 
Cadiz and Xeres. The tribunal continued there for some time. In 
1515 Ferdinand alludes to Luis de Riba Martin ‘‘our late receiver in the 
Inquisition of Xeres,’’ who in dying had left to the treasury a legacy 
of 30,000 mrs. for the relief of his conscience.” I have met no later 
reference to it and probably it was soon afterwards merged into the 
tribunal of Seville. 


? Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 1; Lib. 4, fol. 1; Lib. 929, fol. 63.— 
MSS. of Library of Univ. of Halle, Yc, 20, T. VIII.—Llorente, Afiales, II, 3.— 
Bibl. nationale de France, fonds espagnol, 354, fol. 242. 

2 Informe de Quesada (Bibl. nacional, MSS., Tj., 28).—Llorente, Afiales, I, 
252.—Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Lib. 3, fol. 423. 


1483. 


1491. 


1494. 


1498. 


1507. 


iM. 
LIST OF INQUISITORS-GENERAL. 


Thomds de Torquemada. Appointed in 1483. Died Sept. 16, 
1498. 
Miguel de Morillo is also inquisitor-general in 1491. 


Additional Inquisitors-general, Appointed in 1494. 


Martin Ponce de Leon, Archbishop of Messina. Died in 1500. 

Ifigo Manrique, Bishop of Cordova. Died March 4, 1496. 

Francisco Sanchez de la Fuente, Bishop of Avila. Died Sept., 
1498. 

Alonso Sudrez de Fuentelsaz, Bishop of Jaen. Resigned in 1504. 
Died Nov. 5, 1520. 

Diego Deza, Archbishop of Seville. Commissioned Nov. 24, 
1498, for Castile, Leon and Granada, and Sept. 1, 1499, for 
all Spain. Resigned in 1507. Died July 9, 1523. 


Separation of Inquisitions of Castile and Aragon. 


Castile. Aragon. 

Francisco Ximenes de Cis- | 1507. Juan Enguera, Bishop of 
neros, Cardinal and Arch- Vich (of Lérida in 1511). 
bishop of Toledo. Com- Commissioned June 6, 
missioned June 5, 1507. 1507. Died Feb. 14, 
Died Nov. 8, 1517. 15138 


1513. Luis Mercader, Bishop of 
Tortosa. Commissioned 
July 15, 15138. Died June 
171516: 

Fray Juan Pedro de Poul, 
Dominican Provincial of 
Aragon, also commis- 
sioned by Leo X. Died 
in 1516. 

1516. Adrian of Utrecht, Cardi- 
nal and Bishop of Tor- 
tosa. Commissioned Nov. 
14, 1516. 

(556 ) 


1518 


1523. 


1539. 


1546. 


1547. 


1566. 


1572. 


1573. 


1595. 
1596. 


1599. 


LIST OF INQUISITORS-GENERAL 557 


Reumon of Inquisitions of Castile and Aragon. 


Cardinal Adrian of Utrecht. Commissioned March 14, 1518. 
Elected to papacy Jan. 9, 1522. Continued to act until his 
departure for Rome from Tarragona Aug. 4, 1522. 

Alfonso Manrique, Cardinal and Archbishop of Seville. Com- 
missioned Sept. 10, 1523. Died Sept. 28, 1538. 

Juan Pardo de Tavera, Cardinal and Archbishop of Toledo. 
Appointed June 10, 1539. Commissioned Nov. 7, 1539. Took 
possession Dec. 7, 1539. Died Aug. 1, 1545. 

Francisco Garcia de Loaysa, Archbishop of Seville. Commis- 
sioned Feb. 18, 1546. Took possession March 29, 1546. Died 
April 22, 1546. 

Fernando Valdés, Archbishop of Seville. Commissioned Jan. 
20, 1547. Took possession Feb. 19, 1547. Resigned in 1566. 
Died Dec. 9, 1568. 

Diego Espinosa, Cardinal and Bishop of Sigiienza. Commis- 
sioned Sept. 8, 1566. Took possession Dec. 4, 1566. Died 
Sept. 15, 1572. 

Pedro Ponce de Leon y Cordova, Bishop of Plasencia. Commis- 
sioned Dec. 7, 1572. Did not take possession; his brief 
arrived four hours after his death, Jan. 17, 15783. 

Gaspar de Quiroga, Cardinal and Archbishop of Toledo. Com- 
missioned April 20, 1573. Took possession May 28, 1573. 
Died Nov. 12, 1594. 

Gerénimo Manrique de Lara, Bishop of Avila. Commissioned 
Aug. 1, 1595. Died Nov. 1, 1595. 

Pedro de Portocarrero, Bishop of Cuenca. Commissioned Jan. 
1, 1596. Resigned in 1599. Died Sept. 20, 1600. 

Fernando Nifio de Guevara, Cardinal and Archbishop of Seville. 
Commissioned Aug. 11, 1599. Took possession Dec. 23, 
1599. 

Resigned in 1602. Died Jan. 1, 1609. 


. Juan de Zufiga, Bishop of Cartagena. Commissioned July 29, 


1602. Died Dec. 20, 1602. 


. Juan Bautista Acevedo, Royal Confessor and Patriarch of the 


Indies. Commissioned Jan. 20, 1603. Died July 8, 1608. 


. Bernardo de Sandoval y Roxas, Cardinal and Archbishop of 


Toledo. Commissioned Sept. 12, 1608. Died Dec. 7, 
1618. 


. Luis de Aliaga, Royal Confessor. Commissioned Jan. 4, 1619. 


Resigned in 1621. Died Dec. 3, 1626. 


. Andrés Pacheco, Bishop of Cuenca. Commissioned Feb. 12, 


1622. Died April 7, 1626. 


508 


1627. 


1632. 


1643. 


1665. 


1666. 


1669. 
1695. 
1699. 


1699. 


1705. 
1709. 
valk 
1715. 


Lil7, 


1720. 
1720. 
1733. 
1742. 


1746. 


APPENDIX 


Antonio de Zapata, Cardinal and Archbishop of Burgos, 1600— 
1605. Commissioned Jan. 30, 1627. Resigned in 1632. 
Died April 23, 1635. 

Antonio de Sotomayor, Royal Confessor and Archbishop of 
Damascus. Commissioned July 17, 1632. Resigned June 21, 
1643. Died in 1648. 

Diego de Arce y Reynoso, Bishop of Plasencia. Commissioned 
Sept. 18, 1643. Took possession Nov. 14, 1648. Died June 
20, 1665. 

Pascual de Aragon, Archbishop of Toledo. A document of Oct. 
26, 1665, is drafted in his name. Resigned soon afterwards. 

Juan Everardo Nithardo, Royal Confessor and Cardinal. Com- 
missioned Oct. 15, 1666. Banished Feb. 25, 1669, as ambas- 
sador to Rome. Died in 1681. 

Diego Sarmiento de Valladares, Bishop of Plasencia. Commis- 
sioned Sept. 15, 1669. Died Jan. 29, 1695. 

Juan Thomas de Rocaberti, Archbishop of Valencia. Commis- 
sioned Aug. 2, 1695. Died June 138, 1699. 

Alfonso Fernandez de Cérdova y Aguilar. Died Sept. 19, 1699, 
before the arrival of his brief. 

Balthasar de Mendoza y Sandoval, Bishop of Segovia. Com- 
missioned Oct. 31, 1699. Resigned in 1705. Died Nov. 4, 
1727. 

Vidal Marin, Bishop of Ceuta. Commissioned March 24, 1705. 
Died March 10, 1709. 

Antonio Ybafiez de la Riva-Herrera, Archbishop of Saragossa. 
Commissioned April 5, 1709. Died Sept. 3, 1710. 

Francesco Giudice, Cardinal. Commissioned June 11, 1711. 
Resigned in 1716. Died Oct. 10, 1725. 

Felipe Antonio Gil de Taboada. Commissioned Feb. 28, 1715. 
Did not serve. 

Josef de Molines. Proclaimed Jan. 9, 1717, while in Rome. 
Detained in Milan by the Austrians and died there. 

Juan de Arzamendi. Died without serving. 

Diego de Astorga y Cespedes, Bishop of Barcelona. Commis- 
sioned March 26, 1720. Resigned in 1720. Died Feb. 9, 1724. 

Juan de Camargo, Bishop of Pampeluna. Commissioned July 
18, 1720. Died May 24, 1733. 

Andrés de Orbe y Larreategui, Archbishop of Valencia. Com- 
missioned July 28, 1733. Died Aug. 4, 1740. 

Manuel Isidro Manrique de Lara, Archbishop of Santiago. 
Commissioned Jan. 1, 1742. Died Jan. 10, 1746. 

Francisco Pérez de Prado y Cuesta, Bishop of Teruel. Appointed 
July 26, 1746. Commissioned Aug. 22, 1746. Died in July, 
1755. 


LIST OF INQUISITORS-GENERAL 559 


1755. Manuel Quintano Bonifaz, Archbishop of Pharsalia. Commis- 
sioned Aug. 11,1755. Resigned in 1774. Died Dec. 18, 1775. 

1775. Felipe Beltran, Bishop of Salamanca. Appointed Dec. 27, 1774. 
Commissioned Feb. 27, 1775. ‘Took possession May 5, 1775. 
Died Nov. 30, 1783. 

1784. Agustin Rubin de Cevallos, Bishop of Jaen. Appointed Jan. 
23, 1784. Commissioned Feb. 17, 1784. Took possession 

June 7, 1784. Died Feb. 8, 1798. 

1793. Manuel Abad y la Sierra, Archbishop of Selimbria. Took 
possession May 11, 1793. Resigned in 1794. Died Jan. 12, 
1806. 

1794. Francisco Antonio de Lorenzana, Archbishop of Toledo. Took 
possession Sept. 12, 1794. Resigned in 1797. Died April 17, 
1804. ; 

1798. Ramon Josef de Arce y Reynoso, Archbishop of Saragossa. 
Resigned March 22, 1808. Died in Paris, Feb. 16, 1814. 

1814. Xavier Mier y Campillo, Bishop of Almeria. ‘Took possession 
in August, 1814. In a series of documents he ceases to appear 
about June, 1818, and for some months the Suprema acts as 
in a vacancy. 

1818. Gerénifno Castellon y Salas, Bishop of Tarazona. The earliest 
document in which I have met his signature is dated Oct. 21, 
1818. He had no successor and died April 20, 1835. 


Signature of the Last Inquisitor-general. 
> 


21 OM ie DO Pom Ve oe Bgl E" < 
V4 


iF 


SPANISH COINAGE. 


The question of values has significance in so many of the operations 
of the Inquisition that an outline of the successive mintages of Spain 
becomes almost a necessity. The subject is complicated, after the 
middle of the sixteenth century, by the progressive but fluctuating 
depreciation in the moneda de vellén, or base coinage, which became 
practically the standard of value in all transactions. 

The monetary unit of Castile was the maravedt, anciently a gold 
coin of value but, in the fifteenth century, diminished to a fraction of 
its former estimation. A declaration of Ferdinand and Isabella in 
1503 says that formerly the silver real was equal to 3 maravedis, 
but now it is worth 34.* 

The unit of weight was the marc, or half-pound, of 8 ounces or 
4608 grains. The intermediate weights were the ochavo of 72 grains, 
the adarme of 36 and the tomin of 12. These were applicable to all the 
precious metals but, up to 1731, the mare of gold was reckoned to 
contain 50 castellanos of 8 tomines, making 4800 grains, whereby the 
grain was reduced 3. 

The standard of fineness was fixed, by Ferdinand and Isabella, for 
gold at 23% carats, but was reduced by Charles V to 22 carats, at 
which it remained. For silver the standard maintained since the 
fourteenth century was known as once dineros cuatro granos (pure 
silver being doce dineros) equivalent to .925 fine. In 1709 Philip V 
reduced it to once dineros or .91667, and in some mintages even 
lower. 


Goup Coins. When Ferdinand and Isabella revised the coinage, 
in 1497, they ordered the marc to be worked into 654 excelentes de la 
granada. This coin was worth 374 maravedis and thus was practi- 
cally the same as the ducat or escudo which was rated at 374. There 
were also the dobla alfonsi or castellano or peso de oro, equal to 485, 
the dobla de la banda to 365, the florin to 265. Thus the ducat, which 
was the coin most frequently quoted, was equivalent to 11 silver 
reales. The ratio between gold and silver fluctuated between 7 and 
8 to 1. 


1 Coleccion de Cédulas, IV, 388, 400 (Madrid, 1829). 
( 560 ) 


SPANISH COINAGE 561 


In 1537 Charles V ordered coronas and escudos, 22 carats fine to be 
worked 68 to the mare and to be worth 330 maravedis, which he says 
was the weight and fineness of the best crowns of Italy and France. 
With the progressive depreciation in the value of silver, the coinage 
law of Philip II in 1566 raised the escudo from 330 mrs. to 400. The 
old ducats were to be current at 429 mrs., the castellanos at 544. 
The tendency of silver continued downward and in 1609 Philip III . 
permitted the escudo to pass for 440 mrs., threatening three years’ 
exile and a fine of 500 ducats for asking or receiving morey In 1612 
he allowed the castellano in bullion to be sold for 576 mrs. under 
the same penalties for exceeding it. The escudo or crown remained 
the standard gold coin. In 1642 it was raised to 550 mrs.; in 1643 
to 612 and then reduced to 510 owing to variations in the silver 
and vellén coinage. In 1651 it is rated at 16 silver reales, in 1652 
at 14, in 1686 at 15, but with a new coinage of lighter weight 
silver it was raised to 19, and the doblon, or piece of 2 escudos, to 
40 reales. For larger transactions multiples of the escudo were struck, 
known as doblones de a dos, de a cuatro and de a ocho, containing 
respectively 2, 4 and 8 escudos. The latter, which became popularly 
known as the Spanish doubloon, were rated in 1726 at 18 pesos or 
pieces of eight silver reales, in 1728 at 16, in 1737 at 15 and in 1779 
at 16 again, the doubloon and the peso being virtually of the same 
weight, each a fraction under an ounce. In 1738, to supply the lack 
of silver money there were coined half-crowns of gold, worth in vellén 
18 reales 28 mrs. This fraction was troublesome and, in 1742, the 
weight was changed to correspond with 20 reales, and the coins became 
known as veintenos or escuditos. 


SILVER Corns. The silver unit was the real, which, under the coinage 
laws of Ferdinand and Isabella, was worked 67 to the silver marc, 
of 11 dineros 4 grains fine (.925), worth 34 maravedis. It long 
continued of this standard but, in the financial mismanagement under 
Philip IV, the weight was reduced by ordering the marc worked into 
83 reales and 1 quartillo (834 reales), the old coinage in circulation 
being advanced 25 per cent. in value by making the peso equivalent 
to 10 reales instead of 8, but as this failed to afford the expected relief 
it was suspended in 1643, to be again tried in 1684 when the real was 
reduced to 84 to the mare, and the old coinage was rated at 10 to 8 of 
the new. In 1709 we first hear of the peseta, as a name applied to the 
French coin introduced by the War of Succession, rated at 2 reales, 
and subsequently used to denote the double real of Spanish mintage. 
At the same time the standard was reduced to 11 dineros or .91667 
fine. During the subsequent years of the reign of Philip V the varia- 
tions in the silver coinage were numerous and perplexing. The peso, 
escudo de plata, or piece of 8 reales, was the leading coin, and 

36 


562 APPENDIX 

in 1726 it was ordered that it, whether minted in the Indies or in 
Spain, should be current for 94 reales, and, as this did not bring it to 
an equivalent with gold, in 1728 it was declared equal to 10 reales. 
This however was now confined to the mintage of the Indies, which 
came to be known as plata nacional; the small coinage of the Spanish 
mints was termed provincial and was allowed to remain current at a 
discount of 20 per cent. It was 77 reales to the marc and the fineness 
was only 10 dineros, reduced in 1728 to 9 dineros, 22 grains or .798 
fine, rendering it in reality only about three-quarters the value of the 
standard. There were thus two entirely distinct silver currencies 
coexistent, and to these was added a third, popularly known as Marias 
—“‘nlata nueva que vulgarmente se llaman Marfas’”—which was called 
in by decree of April 27, 1728, but which was still in circulation in 
1736. Under these circumstances considerable circumlocution was 
necessary when quoting sums in silver to define the exact kind of coin 
meant as, for instance, in the coinage law of July 16, 1730, we are told 
that the allowance for expenses to the official known as the Fiel, was 
“un real de plata provincial, valor de 16 quartos de vellén.” In fact, 
as we shall see, the debased coinage known as vellén had become the 
real standard of financial transactions. 

In the later periods it will simplify the appreciation of amounts 
recorded to remind the reader that the peso, or piece of 8 reales, 
is the modern dollar, and the real, or one-eighth of this, is the coin 
familiarly known of old in various parts of the United States as the 
“bit,” the “elevenpenny bit” shortened to “levy,” the ninepence or 
the shilling. The maravedf was =); of this, or about 3 of one cent. 

In the colonies there is frequent allusion to the peso ensayado as 
distinguished from the peso de a ocho, which I gather to be a piece 
worth 400 maravedis, or nearly 114 reales—a little more than a ducat. 


VELLON CornaacE. The debased coinage known as vell6n was an 
alloy of silver and copper, which proved the source of unutterable 
confusion in Spanish finance. As we find it prescribed by Ferdinand 
and Isabella in 1497, it is merely a token coin convenient for small 
transactions, consisting of 7 grains of silver to the mare of copper, 
worked into 192 blancas, the blanca being one-half of the maravedi. 
Complaints were made that it was exported at a profit, so that it 
became scarce, and in 1552 Charles V, to remedy this, reduced the silver 
to 5 grains. The extravagant expenditures of Philip II rendered 
him eager to clutch at any expedient to relieve immediate necessities 
and, in 1566, he adopted the unfortunate device of issuing a moneda 
_de vellén rica, with 24 dineros, 2 grains (98 grains) of silver to the 
mare of copper, to be worked into quartillos, 80 to the marc (worth + 
real or 84 maravedi{s), into quartos, 170 to the mare (worth 4 mara- 
vedis) and medios quartos, 340 to the marc (worth 2 maravedis). The 


SPANISH COINAGE 563 


blancas or half maravedfs, were retained, but the silver in them was 
reduced to 4 grains to the marc, worked into 220 pieces. Although 
there do not appear ever to have been larger coins of vellén issued 
than those authorized by Philip II the flood of this inferior money sup- 
planted the precious metals. It became the basis of all internal trans- 
actions and the precious metals were reduced virtually to the position 
of commodities. There was a restamping of this coinage in 1602, in 
which the silver was omitted, put into forced circulation at a value of 
7 to 2. With all the power of Spain, backed by the treasures of the 
New World and wielded by an autocratic monarchy, it was impossible 
to maintain so vicious and artificial a currency at par, and there fol- 
lowed, during the seventeenth century, a series of the most desperate 
attempts to remedy the evils which were crippling the commerce and 
industry of the nation.* In 1619 there was a solemn promise made 
that no more of the pernicious stuff should be issued for twenty years— 
a promise only made to be broken and renewed in 1632. In 1625, 
under the severest penalties, the premium on gold and silver was 
limited to 10 per cent., and in 1628 the nominal value was reduced 
one-half, but in 1636 the permissible premium on silver was recognized 
as 25 per cent., immediately after which the vell6n coinage was 
restamped and trebled in value. In 1640 the premium was allowed 
to be 28 per cent. and in 1641 there was another restamping and the 
value was doubled, followed by recognizing the premium as 50 per 
cent. In some accounts before me of the salaries and expenses of the 
Supreme Council of the Inquisition, not dated, but evidently belonging 
to this period, the figures set down are increased when added, in one 
case by 28 per cent. and in another by 50, to adjust them to the cur- 
rency in which they were expected to be paid. In other statements 
some items are specified as payable in vellén and others in plata. In 
the effort to bring the vellén to par in 1642, it was suddenly reduced 
to one-sixth of its current value and then, in 1643, it was raised four- 
fold. This resulted, in 1647, in a premium of 25 per cent., but when, 
in 1651, it was again restamped and restored to the value which it bore 


1 Asan incident to this fictitious valuation of the vellén coinage, counterfeiting 
flourished to an enormous extent, unrepressed by the severest penalties. The 
importation of coins manufactured abroad added to the confusion, for it was too 
lucrative to be prevented by even the most rigorous measures. In 1614 a chron- 
icler states that since the recent doubling of the nominal value of the cuartos five 
or six millions in vell6n money had been brought from England and Holland, 
stowed in vessels under wheat. It was exchanged for silver at 30 per cent. dis- 
count and the silver exported. The remedy devised was to bring inland twenty 
leagues from the coast the foreign traders engaged in the business, but this remedy 
was found to be worse than the disease and was abandoned (Cabrera, Relaciones, 
pp. 551, 553). We shall see hereafter that the Inquisition was invoked to put 
an end to this traffic. 


564 APPENDIX 


prior to 1642, the premium rose to 50 percent. In June, 1652, another 
attempt was made to reduce it to one-fourth, but this seems to have 
been a failure and in November the edict was suspended. In 1660 its 
further issue was suspended and the experiment was again tried of 
an alloy containing 20 grains of silver to the marc, or about z4,, 
which became known as moneda de molino de vellén ligado. This was 
so unsuccessful that, in 1664, its nominal value was reduced one-half 
and all other vell6n currency was prohibited, while in February, 1680, 
a still further reduction of 75 per cent. in its value was ordered 
and in May its use was forbidden, it was declared to have no value 
as currency, and the premium of 50 per cent. was permitted as against 
other vell6n coins, which had still continued in circulation. This 
lasted for four years, when in 1684 the moneda de molino was restored 
to circulation with a nominal value double that of the last reduction.’ 
With the eighteenth century the pretence of alloying copper with a 
fraction of silver was abandoned. In 1718 a pure copper coinage was 
issued and by this time the premium on specie recognized by law had 
advanced to nearly 100 per cent. In spite of the prohibitions to ask 
or receive more than this, people were forced to pay more. Traders kept 
the copper coinage tied up in bags representing the larger coins and 
refused to furnish the latter except at an advance.” The premium 
gradually rose until, in 1737, the real de plata provincial was recog- 
nized legally as worth 2 reales de vellon and the real de plata nacional 
as worth 24. Although there were no coined reales de vellén, 
they were the standard money of account on which all transactions 
were based. In the laws regulating the mints the salaries of the officials 
are always stated in vell6n. Thus, in 1718, the superintendent of the 
mint of Madrid has 24,000 reales de vellén, the treasurer 16,000, and 
so forth. In 1728 the superintendent is allowed 500 escudos de vellén, 


1 Under these perpetual changes it will be readily understood how difficult it 
is to estimate values at any special period. In a document of 1670 I find the 
doblon converted into reales de vellén at the rate of 1 to 81, although in this 
case the doblon was of 4 pesos or 32 reales de plata. Similar to this is the con- 
version in another item of 162 reales de plata into 405 reales de vellén, showing 
that vell6n was at a discount of 60 per cent. or specie at a premium of 150.— 
Arch. de Simancas, Inquisicion, Leg. 1476, fol. 2, 61. 

The unutterable confusion produced by these sudden and arbitrary changes 
in the legal value of the coinage is illustrated by a contention, in 1683, between 
the auditor-general and the receiver-general of the Suprema, respecting the 
accountability of the latter for funds on hand and receipts and payments at the 
time when the pragmdtica of February 10, 1680, went into effect, involving points 
of which the equities were not easy to determine.—Ibid., Leg. 1480, fol. 129. 

? It was probably from this that the custom arose in giving receipts for money 
to reserve or to renounce, as the case might be, “las leyes y excepciones de la non 
numerata pecunia.”’ 


SPANISH COINAGE 565 


the contador 400, ete. In 1730 it is provided that the sum of 120,000 
reales de velldn is to be placed in the hands of the treasurer for current 
expenses and he is to give security in 20,000 ducados de vell6n on 
unencumbered real estate. From this it follows that, when the kind 
of coin is not specified, there may be some difficulty in estimating the 
value of a sum of money mentioned. The difference between silver 
and vell6n went on increasing. In 1772, when a new coinage of gold 
and silver was issued, the gold escudo, worth 16 reales de plata, was 
declared to be worth 374 reales de vellén. 

With the Revolution the old coinage passed away and was replaced 
by the decimal system, the peseta and céntimo being equivalent to the 
French france and centime. Yet still prices continue to be quoted in 
reales, which are now rated at 25 céntimos, or about 5 cents of 
American money. 

Nothing is more difficult than to ascertain accurately the variation 
in the purchasing power of money, but perhaps the price of labor 
affords the most trustworthy standard. In the fifteenth century this 
would seem to have been about 6 maravedis a day. In the eighteenth, 
common laborers employed in the mints received 34 reales de vellén 
per diem, while those in more confidential positions such as watchmen 
were paid 6.’ 


As a matter of course the kingdoms of the Crown of Aragon had 
their independent systems of coinage, which were based on the old 
divisions of the marc, almost everywhere prevalent, of libras, sueldos 
and dineros, or pounds, shillings and pence, there being 20 sueldos 
to the libre. and 12 dineros to the sueldo. In the documents of the 
early period there are frequent fluctuations in the relations between 
these coins and the Castilian system, but as a rule there were reckoned 
20 Aragonese sueldos to the ducat, which therefore was equivalent to 
the libra. In Catalonia the sueldo barcelonense was 24 to the ducat, and 
there was also a coin known as morabatin, equal to 9sueldos. Unifica- 
tion of currency throughout the monarchy was a desirable object, long 
frustrated by the stubborn particularism of the provinces. It was 
especially difficult to bring about in Catalonia, where the vellén coinage 
had been largely diluted by the allies during their long occupation of 
the principality in the War of Succession. An edict of 1733 informs us 
that there were 24 dineros to the Catalan real, but most of those in cir- 


’ Full information as to the coinage of the fifteenth century will be found in 
Saez, Demostracion del Valor de las Monedas que corrian durante el Reinado 
de Don Enrique IV (Madrid, 1805). 

For the subsequent period reference is made to the very voluminous series of 
laws and decrees preserved in the Nueva Recopilacion, Lib. V, Tit. xxi; the 
Autos Acordados, Lib. V, Tit. xxi and xxii, and the Novisima Recopilacion, 
Lib. rx, Tit. xvii. 


566 APPENDIX 


culation of the coinage of 1653 had been restamped by the allies to 
double their nominal value. They had also coined dinerillos Catalanes, 
with the same alloy of silver as the mintage of 1653, but with only half 
the weight, yet circulated at the full value. The edict denounces the 
dinerillos of both Aragon and Catalonia as an intolerable abuse and with 
superfluous emphasis orders their use to be abandoned, immediately in 
Aragon and in Catalonia as soon as sufficient money of velloén can be 
coined to take their place. The effort was futile for another edict of 
1737 assimilates the dinerillo of Aragon and Valencia to the Castilian 
ochavo, or piece of 2 maravedis, and the dinerillo of Catalonia to 1 
maravedi. In 1743, in consequence of disputes arising between troops 
quartered in Catalonia and the peasants, it was ordered that the vellon 
money cf Castile should circulate freely in Aragon, Catalonia and 
Majorca. As late as 1772 an edict calls in the local small coinage of 
Valencia and orders it replaced with Castilian money, but this was so 
unsuccessful that it was followed, in 1777, with one confining the use of 
these coins to Valencia and forbidding their circulation elsewhere. 
When the unification of the currency occurred does not clearly appear, 
but it probably was not until the revision of the monetary system in 
the present century. 

The old cruzado of Portugal, to which reference sometimes occurs, 
was virtually the same as the Spanish ducat. 


DOCUMENTS. 
1, 


LETTER OF KING FERDINAND TO THE INQUISITOR-GENERAL TOR- 
QUEMADA, July 22, 1486. 
(See pp. 1382, 254, 291). 


(Archivo General de la Corona de Aragon, Registro 3684, fol. 102). 


Eu Rey. 

Devoto padre Prior. Vuestra carta vi e las otras de los otros inquisi- 
dores de Qaragoca y el memorial que vos embiaron. A la carta vuestra 
con otra de mi mano vos respondo e a las de los inquisidores e mandado 
responder e sera la carta con la presente. E quanto a lo del memorial 
6 instruccion que escriben sobre lo que Don Juan de Ribera no faze 
la guerra fasta haber carta de mano mia e de la serenisima reina mi 
muy cara e muy amada mujer luego le ascribieramos salvo porque 
toda la gente suya havemos mandado venir para donde himos y sin 
gente ninguna cosa podria hazer. Plazera a nuestro senyor que con 
nuestra ida se remediard presto e volverse ha la gente a la frontera 
de Navarra e luego mandaremos a Don Juan que apriete a los de 
Tudela en guisa que fagan la razon. Quanto a lo que scriven en el 
tercero capitulo de la limosna que les parece se debe facer de sus bienes 
a los pobres penitenciados imponiendolos alguna pecuniaria sentencia, 
porque los conversos de aquella ciudad son muy conocidos y podria 
ser que alld les dieren a entender una cosa por otra me parece que 
les debeis escribir que envien relacion de quien son, specificando los 
nombres de cada uno e que bienes tienen e quantas sentencias e que 
penitencia les parece que se debe dar a todos e a cada uno dellos, 
porque, sabida la relacion de todo ello se podré mejor determinar lo 
que en ello se debe facer. Quanto a la particion de los bienes dentre 
marido e muger quando el uno es sentenciado y el otro se falla inmune 
porque es cosa que esta en drecho y en fuero del reino me parece que 
lo debeis mandar veer a micer Ponce y otros letrados y que sea men- 
ester y mas convenga. Quanto al cinqueno capitulo que fabla de las 
carceles perpetuas es muy gran razon que se faga e yo enbio a mandar 
al receptor que las faga. Quanto al sexto capitulo en que dicen que 
se embie a mandar que se ha de dar a los encarcerados para su man- 
tenemiento me parece escriban aca su parecer y entonce sobrello 
podremos determinar lo que paresca mas razonable. Quanto al seteno 

(567 ) 


568 APPENDIX 


que dicen que han tomado un hombre para tormentar porque dicen 
que los nuncios no lo quieren facer ni fallan quien lo faga, me parece 
que por scusar tantos salarios devrian echar uno de los nuncios e que 
la persona que han tomado para tormentar sirviere de nuncio e se le 
diese el mismo salario e puesto que esto no se puede facer se debe 
limitar el salario, porque seiscientos sueldos es muy sobrado salario. 
Quanto al ocheno capitulo en que fabla del salario de Don Ramon 
de Mur es justa cosa que pues que bien sirve sea muy bien pagado, e 
se le den dos mil sueldos de salario. Quanto al noveno capitulo que 
fabla de los porteros estoy maravillado que pagando tan gran salario 
como se pagé al aguacil allende aquello se hayan de pagar porteros 
que ac& como sabeis todo esta a cargo del aguacil. Debeis les mucho 
encargar a los inquisidores que lo miren porque se asi no lo fazen mas 
montaran los salarios que proceda de la inquisicion. Quanto al deceno 
capitulo que dice que han de facer e fazen un lugarteniente de aguacil 
para enviar de fuera, parece que se les debe escribir que en las cosas 
que buenamente escusar se pudieren lo deben escusar, faciendo ir a 
ello al alguacil principal, pero no pudiendo ir el fagase un lugarteniente 
como lo acostumbran de facer, pero sea el salario lo menos que ser 
pueda porque bien mirado son muy excesivos los salarios que se pagan 
ala inquisicion. En lo que dicen que tengo fecha merced de los bienes 
de Pedro de Urrea saben poco en la verdad porque es cierto que de 
aquellos ni de otros tengo fecha merced a nadie. Quanto al onceno 
capitulo en que demandan carta de marca e represalia para Tudela 
por el negocio de Martin de Santangel ha de preceder carta requisitoria 
la qual debeis mandar ordenar allé a micer Ponte y enviandola aca 
luego se despachara. En el dozeno esta ya respondido y quanto a lo 
que escriben en el treceno que no han egecutado los matadores de 
maestre Epila pluguierame mucho que vos escribieran las causas 
porque. Quanto al catorceno capitulo en que escriben que seria 
bueno que fuere maestro Crespo a entender en la inquisicion con el 
abad de Barbastro, buen hombre es sin duda e pareceme bien que vaya 
e asimismo me parece bien micer Tristan de la Porta para que vaya 
a fazer assesor como lo escriben en el quatorceno capitulo que buen 
letrado es e hombre de buena fama. En el dezeseyseno e ultimo 
demandan un escribano para los bienes que se han de litigar por 
justicia y lo han de determinar ellos como jueces. Verdaderamente 
demandan tantos oficiales y acrecentamiento de tantos salarios que 
es menester que se mire mucho en ello, mayormente que es cierto 
segun Camanyas me ha dicho que los escribanos de la inquisicion 
sienten ainjuria que otro entiende en el dicho negocio sino ellos, mayor- 
mente que podrian poner en ello criado suyo de quien se confien. Si 
en todo lo sobredicho o en algo dello vos parece otra cosa vedlo alla 
y escrivitme vuestro parecer porque sobre todo se mire e se faga lo 
mejor. 


DOCUMENTS 569 


Camanyas me dijo como vos habia fablado sobre los Judios de 
Teruel que les han mandado ir dentro de termino de tres meses e que 
dize se fizo con voluntad mia. Essa es la verdad que assi me plugo 
e me plaze dello e nunca serd de otro parecer; verdad es que en lo 
del tiempo tienen razon porque creo que en tampoco tiempo no podrian 
pagar y cobrar deudas maiormente teniendo como tienen censales, ni 
podrian vender las casas y heredamientos que tienen e por esso sera 
bien si asi a vos paresciere que se les den otros seis meses de tiempo 
sobre los tres que los inquisidores han dado porque de aquellos segun 
dicen ha pasado ya buena parte. Vedlo vos e si os paresciere bien 
asi fagase. E por agora no ocurre otro que escrivir salvo que vos 
ruego mucho que de la salut de vuestra persona continuamente me 
fagais sabidor. Del Viso 4 xx1r de julio de Lxxxvi afios. Yo el Rey. 
Por mandado del Rey. Camanyas. 


re 


Epict oF May 30, 1492, ReauLaTinc SETTLEMENTS WITH THE 
EXPELLED JEWS. 


(Biblioteca Nacional de Espafia, Seccion de MSS., Dd, 108, fol. 126). 
(See p. 136). 


Don Fernando et Dofia Isabel, por la gracia de Dios Rey et Reyna 
de Castilla, ete. 

Al Nuestro Justicia Maior et a los de nuestro Consejo et oydores de 
la nuestra Audiencia, Alcalles et otras Justicias de la nuestra Casa et 
Corte et Chancelleria e a los Corregidores e Assistentes, Alcalles, 
Merinos, Alguaciles et otras Justicias qualesquier de las Cibdades e 
Villas e Logares de los nuestros Reynos e Sefiorios et a cada uno et 
qualquier de vos a quien esta nuestra Carta fuere mostrada o su 
traslado signado de escrivano publico, Salud e gracia. Bien savedes 
et deveis saber como nos por algunas justas cabsas que a ello nos 
movieron complideras al servicio de Dios e nuestro e bien e pro comun 
de nuestros Reynos e nuestros subditos e naturales dellos, mandamos 
‘por nuestras cartas firmadas de nuestros nombres et selladas con 
nuestro sello, que todos los Judios et moradores y estantes en los 
dichos nuestros Reynos e Sefiorios salgan dellos de aqui ha en fin del 
mes de Jullio primero que viene deste presente afio de la Data desta 
nuestra carta, so ciertas penas contenidas en las dichas nuestras Cartas. 
Agora por parte de algunas aljamas de los dichos Judios et personas 
particulares dellos nos es fecha relacion que ellos deven e son obligados 
a dar e pagar algunas contias de maravedises et otras cosas ha algunas 


570 APPENDIX 


personas Christianas e Moros nuestros subditos e naturales et ellos et 
otras personas les deven a ellos otras quantias de maravedises et otras 
cosas et que ellos no tienen con que pagar salbo con las dichas debdas 
et algunas bienes raices, et que si aquellos e las dichas debdas non les 
oviesen de recebir en pago por su justo precio et valor que recebirian 
agravio e dafio, et nos fue suplicado que cerca de ello les mandasemos 
proveer de remedio como la nuestra merced fuese. Et porque nuestra 
merced e voluntad es que lo que asi mandamos cerca de salir de los 
dichos Judios se cumpla en el dicho termino et en ello non se ponga 
impedimento alguno, tovimoslo por bien. Por que vos mandamos a 
todos et a cada uno de vos en nuestros logares e jurisdicciones que 
luego que con esta nuestra carta o con el dicho su traslado signado 
como dicho es, fueredes requeridos, la qual mandamos que vos sea 
notificada dentro de veinte dias primeros siguientes de la data della 
fagais pregonar publicamente por ante escrivano publico por las Plazas 
e Mercados e otros logares acostumbrados que todos los Christianos e 
Moros a quien deven los dichos Judios qualesquier debdas, o Judios 
a quien devan Christianos o Moros otras debdas parescan et se pre- 
senten ante vos las dichas Justicias donde biben los deudores a pedir e 
liquidar et averiguar las debdas et otras abciones que los unos deban 
a los otros, las quales liquides e averigues et llamadas et oidas las 
partes, procediendo en la liquidacion simplemente et de plano sin 
estrepitu et figura de juicio, solamente sabida la verdad, por manera 
que todas las dichas debdas et abciones sean liquidadas et averiguadas 
e sentenciadas fasta mediado el dicho mes de Jullio primero que viene 
y las que hallardes que los plazos a que se han de pagar fueren llegados 
o llegaren al dicho termino, las hagais luego dar e pagar a las partes 
que lo ovieren de aver por las personas que las deven, et los Judios 
que non tovieren bienes muebles et semovientes para pagar lo que asi 
devieren castigades et apremiedes et costringades a los dichos Chris- 
tianos e Moros a que tomen et resciban en pago de sus debdas otras 
debdas liquidadas con las partes que se deven a los Judios por Chris- 
tianos o Moros, o en bienes rayces apreciados por su justo precio e 
valor por vos las dichas Justicias con dos buenas personas que en ello 
entiendan et con tanto que los dichos Vienes rayces que asi se dieren 
en pago apreciados sean en lugares donde son vezinos et abitantes las 
personas a quien se deven las dichas debdas. Et en las debdas que se 
debieren por los dichos Judios que non llegaren los plazos durante el 
dicho termino de fasta mediado el dicho mes de Jullio, den seguridad 
dellas a vista de vos las dichas Justicias para las pagar a los plazos 
que las devieren et sinon dieren la dicha seguridad paguen luego las 
tales debdas, pues se han de ir et despues non avrian contra quien 
aver recurso. Et en quanto a las debdas que se deben a los dichos 
Judios por Christianos o Moros que non fueren llegados los plazos nin 
llegaren dentro del dicho termino, hazed que quede averiguado e 


DOCUMENTS 571 


liquidado segund dicho es para que puedan dexar los dichos Judios 
sus procuradores Christianos o Moros o persona en quien cedieren o 
traspasasen las tales debdas o otros sus bienes et abciones para que las 
cobren a los plazos et segund et en la manera que los debdores les 
estavan et fueron obligados para la qual todo que dicho es con todas 
sus incidencias et dependencias vos damos poder complido, lo qual 
todo haced et complid sin embargo de qualesquier leyes, fueros e 
derechos e ordenamientos que en contrario desto sean, con las quales 
et con cada una dellas dispensamos et las derogamos en quanto a esto 
atafe, quedando en su fuerza e vigor para delante. Et los unos nin 
los otros non fagades nin fagan endeal por alguna manera so pena de 
la nuestra merced et de diez mill maravedises para la nuestra camara 
al que lo contrario fisiese. Et demas mandamos al ome que les esta 
nuestra carta mostrare que los emplase que parescan ante nos en la 
nuestra Corte doquier que nos seamos del dia que los emplasasse fasta 
quince dias primeros siguientes so la dicha pena so la qual mandamos 
a qualquier escrivano publico que para esto fuere llamado que dende 
al que se la mostrare testimonio signado con su signo porque nos 
Ssepamos en como se cumple nuestro mandado. Dada en la Ciudad de 
Cordovaa treinte dias del mes de Mayo, afio del nascimiento de nuestro 
Salvador Jesu Christo de mill e quatrocientos e noventa e dos afios.— 
Yo el Rey.—Yo la Reina.—Yo Ferrand Alvarez de Toledo, Secretario 
del Rey e de la Reyna nuestros sefiores la fize escrivir por su mandado. 
—En la forma acordada, Rodericus Dottor.—Registrada, Perez Fran- 
cisco de Madrid, Chanciller. 
(Hallase original en el Archivo de la Ciudad de Toledo). 


III. 
ToRQUEMADA’s INSTRUCTIONS TO INQuisIToRS, Dec., 1484.’ 


(Archivo General de Simancas, Consejo de la Inquisicion, Libro 933). 
(See p. 182). 


Otras Capitulaciones por el Reverendo Seftor Padre Prior de Santa Cruz 


hechas por sus Altezas € confirmadas. 


Por mandado de los serenisimos rey 6 reyna nuestros sefiores yo 
el prior de santa cruz, confesor de sus altezas, inquisidor general por 
la abtoridad apostolica en los reynos de Castilla é de Aragon, hordené 
los articulos siguientes cerca de algunas cosas tocantes 4 la sancta 


1 These instructions are supplementary to those issued by the assembly of 
Inquisitors in Seville, Nov. 29, 1484. Some of them are printed by Arguello, 
but they are not in the Granada edition of 1537 of the Instructions. 


572 APPENDIX 


inquisicion é 4 sus ministros é oficiales los quales dichos capitulos 
mandan sus altezas que se guarden é cumplan é yo de parte de sus 
altezas é por la abtoridad susodicha asi lo mando é son las que se 
siguen. 

1. Primeramente que en cada partido donde fuere necesario poner 
inquisicion é en los que agora la hay é se facen, aya dos inquisidores 
con un buen asesor los quales sean personas letrados de buena fama 
é conciencia los mas idoneos que se puedan haber é que se les dé 
alguacil é fiscal 6 notarios y los otros oficiales que son necesarios para 
la inquisicion los quales sean asi mesmo personas aviles é diligentes 
en su calidad é que 4 los dichos inquisidores é oficiales les den é sean 
situados sus salarios que deben haber, y es la merced de sus altezas 
é mandan que ninguno de los dichos oficiales lleve de su oficio derechos 
algunos por los abtos que hiciere en la dicha inquisicion 6 en los 
negocios é cosas della dependientes so pena de perder el oficio, é man- 
dan que ninguno de los inquisidores tengan oficial ninguno del dicho 
oficio por su familiar porque al bien del negocio é al servicio de sus 
altezas asi cumple. 

2. Item plaze 4 sus altezas que en corte de Roma se ponga una 
buena persona que sea letrado é de buen celo para que procure los 
negocios tocantes 4 toda la inquisicion destos reinos é que sea pagado 
competentemente de los bienes confiscados por el delicto de la heregia 
é apostasia que pertinescen 4 sus altezas é que asi lo mandan 4 sus 
tesoreros. 

3. Item por quanto en tiempo de Sixto papa quarto de buena me- 
moria hemanaran de la corte Romana algunos rescriptos é bulas é con- 
fesionarios exorvitantes é contra derecho mucho en perjuicio de la 
inquisicion é ministros della, mandan sus altezas que se libren cartas 
é provisiones que juntas sean generales para todo el reino con las 
quales se impida é pueda impedir justamente la ejecucion de los tales 
rescriptos é bulas, si alguno los impetrare é quisiere usar dellos fasta 
que con el papa sea consultado é informado de la verdad por parte 
de sus altezas, por quanto no es de presumir que la intencion del santo 
padre sea dar impedimento en los negocios de la santa fe catolica, 
pero que las dichas provisiones de sus altezas no se publiquen fasta 
ver si el papa Inoscencio octavo moderno algunas bulas 6 requisitos 
concede 6 de lugar que se expidan en su corte en perjuicio de la 
sancta inquisicion. 

4. Item es la merced de sus altezas porque los inquisidores é sus 
oficiales clerigos que trabajan en la dicha inquisicion sean aprove- 
chados é honrados de mandar 4 sus embajadores que procuren en su 
nombre un indulto del papa para que sus altezas puedan nombrar 4 
las dichas personas de la dicha inquisicion en ciertas iglesias de sus 
reinos en las primeras dignidades é beneficios que vacaren é que 
aquellos sean reservados para los nombrados de sus altezas. 


DOCUMENTS 573 


5. Otrosi mandan sus altezas que por quanto tienen por bien de 
hacer merced de sus bienes 4 todos aquellos que como quier que 
fuesen culpados en el delicto de la heretica pravedat se reconciliaren 
bien é como deben en el tiempo de la gracia que los tales reconciliados 
puedan cobrar qualesquier debdas de qualesquier tiempo que les 
fuesen debidas para si é que su fisco no les embargue asi mesmo 
si algunos bienes muebles é raices hayan vendido, dado 6 otorgado 6 
obligado antes de su reconciliacion que los dichos contractos queden 
firmos 4 las personas que administren los dichos bienes porque es la 
merced de sus altezas 6 mandan que los dichos reconciliados no puedan 
vender ni enagenar ni obligar dende en adelante los bienes raices que 
tovieren sin especiai licentia de sus altezas porque quieren ser primero 
informados de como guardan la santa fe catolica é si son verdadera- 
mente convertido 4 ella. 

6. Item como quiera que sus altezas no tienen por bien de hacer 
gracia de los bienes 4 los hereges é apostatas que fueron reconciliados 
fuera del tiempo de la gracia para la reconciliacion y les pertinezcan 
todos los bienes de los hereges condempnados e reconciliados desde 
el dia que cometieron el dicho delicto de la heregia segun el derecho 
dispone y podria el fisco de sus altezas demandar los bienes que los 
tales ovieren vendido 6 enagenado en qualquier manera é escusarse 
de pagar las debdas que los tales debiesen por qualquier obligaciones, 
salvo si en lugar de las tales ventas é enagenaciones paresciere y se 
hallare el prescio é otra cosa equivalente en los bienes de los tales 
hereges, pero por mas de clemencia é umagnidad con sus vasallos y 
porque si algunos con buena fe contrataron con los dichos hereges 
que no sean condempnados que sean reconciliados como dicho es 
hicieron antes que comengase el afio de setenta é nueve, valgan é sean 
firmes, con tanto que se prueben legitimamente por testigos dignos 
de fe 6 por scripturas abtenticas que sean verdaderas é no simuladas 
en tal manera que si alguna persona hiciere alguna ynfinta 6 simulacion 
en fraude del fisco cerca de qualquier contrato 6 fuere participante en 
la dicha fraude 6 colusion y fuere reconciliado le den cient azotes y le 
hierren con una sefial de hierro en el rostro, y si fuere qualquier otro 
que no sea reconciliado aunque sea cristiano haya perdido todos sus 
bienes é el oficio é oficios que toviere é que su persona quede 4 su 
merced de sus altezas, 6 mandan que este capitulo sea pregonado pub- 
licamente en los lugares de la inquisicion porque ninguno pueda pre- 
tender ignorancia. 

7. Otrosi que si algun caballero de los que han acogido 6 acogieren 
en sus tierras los hereges que por temor de la inquisicion huyan y 
huyeron de las cibdades, villas é lugares realengos demandaren quales- 
quier debdas que digan serles debidas por qualesquier hereges que 
sean huydos 4 sus tierras que no el tesorero no les pague las debdas 
ya dichas ni el juez de los bienes confiscados se las mande pagar fasta 


574 APPENDIX 


que los dichos caballeros restituyan todo lo que los dichos confesos 
que cogieron en sus tierras llevaron consigo, pues es cierto que aquella 
pertenescia é pertenesce 4 sus altezas é que si sobre tales debdas fuere 
puesta demanda al procurador fiscal que el dicho procurador ponga 
por reconvencion € compensacion la cantidad en que poco mas 6 
menos le parescere que es obligado el caballero que pide su debda 
jurando que no lo alega maliciosamente. 

8. Otrosi mandan sus altezas que ningun tesorero de los que son 
6 fueren puestos para recebir é recabdar los bienes confiscados por 
el dicho delicto no secresten ni occupen bienes de ningund herege ni 
apostata sin mandamiento especial de los dichos inquisidores é quando 
ellos dieren mandamiento para ello hagase la secrestacion por su 
alguacil é por ante notario de la inquisicion é por antel escribano del 
tesorero para que cada uno dellos haga registro del dicho secresto el 
qual mandan que se haga en personas llanas vecinos del lugar que 
tengan los dichos bienes é quel tesorero no toque en ellos fasta que 
la persona cuyos eran los dichos bienes sea condenada 6 por recon- 
ciliacion declarada que fue herege 6 manda é mandan sus altezas que 
al tiempo de la secrestacion se oviere de hacer el tesorero sea 
requerido por el alguacil para que vaya 4 ver como se face. 

9 Que si en los bienes asi secrestados como dicho es oviere é se fal- 
laren algunas cosas que guardandolas se perderian asi como pan é vino 
é otras cosas semejantes que el tesorero procure con los inquisidores 
que las manden vender é al presente se vendan en publica almoneda 
é que el prescio de las tales cosas sea puesto en el dicho secresto en 
poder de los dichos secrestadores 6 en un cambio como mejor los dichos 
inquisidores y el tesorero vieren, asi mismo si algunos bienes raices 
Ovieren que se deban arrendar manden los dichos inquisidores al 
secrestador que Juntamente con el dicho tesorero los arriende en pub- 
lica almoneda. 

10. Otrosi que el tesorero no venda bienes algunos ni reciba dineros 
ni qualesquier bienes algunos otros que sean confiscados é pertenescian 
al fisco de sus altezas sin que esten delante de dos notarios uno suyo 
del dicho tesorero é otro que sea puesto por magno de sus altezas 
para que cada uno dellos escriba sobre si los bienes 6 maravedises que 
el dicho tesorero rescibiere é haga registro é libro ordenado de todo 
ello para que [de] los dichos libros é registros se tomen despues las 
cuentas al dicho recebdor. 

11. Otrosi mandan sus altezas que cada uno de los recebtores que 
fueren puestos por su mandado recabten é resciban los bienes que fueren 
de los herejes vecinos é moradores en el partido donde son puestos é 
no se entremetan 4 ocupar ni tomar bienes de ningun hereje que 
pertenezcan 4 otra inquisicion mas que luego qualquier de los dichos 
tesoreros hobiere noticia de algunos bienes confiscados por el dicho 
delicto que pertenezcan 4 otro tesorero que lo hagan luego saber para 


DOCUMENTS 575 


que lo cobre é recabte so pena que el que lo encubriera pierde el oficio 
6 sea obligado al dafio é menoscabo que por su negligencia se recres- 
ciere al patrimonio de sus altezas con el doblo. 

12. Otrosi mandan sus altezas que a los inquisidores é oficiales que 
en este negocio de la inquisicion entienden el tesorero les pague los 
tercios de sus salarios adelantados en el principio de cada tercio porque 
tengan que comer é se les quite ocasion de recebir dadivas é que es 
comience el tiempo de su paga desde el dia que salieren de sus casas 
4 entender en la dicha inquisicion, é que asi mesmo pague los men- 
sageros que 4 sus altezas enviaren los dichos inquisidores é qualquier 
otras cosas que los inquisidores vieren que cumple al oficio asi como 
en carceles perpetuas 6 mantenimientos de los presos 6 otras quales- 
quier cosas é espensas. 

13. Item que todos los mandamientos de qualquier calidad que sean 
que los inquisidores mandaren dar asi para su alguacil como para su 
tesorero 6 para qualesquier otras personas cerca de los bienes 6 prision 
de las personas de los herejes, los negocios de la inquisicion, sean 
tenidos de los asentar é asienten en sus registros é hagan libros dellos 
aparte, porque si alguna dubda se ofresciere se pueda saber la verdad 
de lo que paso. 

14. Otrosi que las otras cosas que aqui no son declarados queden é 
se remitan 4 la buena discreccion de los inquisidores para que si se 
ofrescieren casos tales que 4 su parescer se puedan espedir sin con- 
sultar 4 sus altezas hagan segun Dios é derecho é sus buenas concien- 
cias lo que les paresciere é en las cosas graves escriban luego con 
diligencia 4 sus altezas é 4 mi el dicho procurador para que sus altezas 
manden proveer en ello como cumpla al servicio de Dios nuestro sefior 
é suyo, ensalzamiento de nuestra sancta fe catolica é 4 buena edifica- 
cion de la cristiandad. Dada en la ciudad de Sevilla, seis dias del mes 
de Deziembre, afio del nascimiento de nuestro salvador Jesucristo, 
de mil é quatrocientos é ochenta é quatro afios. 


576 APPENDIX 


TV 
TorquEMADA’s InstRUcTIONS TO INQuisIToRS, Jan., 1485." 


(Archivio General de Simancas, Consejo de la Inquisicion, 
Libro 933). 
(See p. 182). 


La Forma que se debe tener en el proceder de los Inquisidores es la 
siguiente. 


Primeramente que los inquisidores loego en legando en el lugar 
donde se ha de facer la inquisicion pongan sus cartas e edictos de 
treinta 6 quarenta dias 6 como mejor visto les fuese que todos los que 
en algun caso de heregia 6 apostasia se fallaran culpados y en este 
dicho tiempo vernan con dolor sin fuerza ninguna 4 confesar sus 
errores y diran la verdad de todo lo que supiere no solamente de si 
mesmos mas de los otros que con ellos participaren en el dicho error, 
que estos tales sean recebidos con toda caridad, y abjurando sus 
errores en forma les sean dadas penitencias publicas 6 secretas segun 
la infamia 6 calidad del delito 4 alvedrio de los inquisidores y denseles 
aleunas penitencias pecuniarias que paguen en cierto tiempo, y estos 
dineros sean puestos en mano de una persona fiable y den los inquisi- 
dores 6 los escribanos la copia dellos al rey nuestro sefior 6 4 mi como 
& inquisidor principal, para que se gasten en la guerra 6 en otras obras 
pias y para que se paguen los salarios de los inquisidores y otros min- 
istros que en la santa inquisicion entenderan, y seanles dexados todas 
los otros bienes que tuvieren asi mobles como raices, y cerca de los 
oficios publicos que tienen deben por ahora ser privados fasta que se 
vea su forma de vevir, y si fueren buenos cristianos y conocidamente 
se viere la enmienda en ellos pueden ser habilitados para que ayan 
los dichos oficios si fueren vacos 6 otros semejables. 

1. Otrosi si despues del tiempo del edicto algunos vinieren 4 se 
reconciliar, los quales non dejaron de venir por temor ni por menos- 
precio mas por enfermedad 6 por otro justo impedimento, que con 
estos tales se use de misericordia como en el capitulo primero, pero si 


, 


al tiempo que se vinieren 4 reconciliar fueron ya citados 6 tienen 


1 These instructions partly repeat and partly supplement those of December, 
1484. So far as I am aware they are inedited. They are not in the Granada 
edition of the Instructions, nor do they correspond with the fragments printed 
by Arguello (Instrucciones del Santo Oficio, Madrid, 1630, fol. 16-23) as the 
Instructions of January, 1485, and by Llorente, Afiales, I, 96-99, 388-94. 


DOCUMENTS 577 


contra si provantes, estos non gocen de la gracia de los bienes, pero 
los inquisidores se hayan con ellos misericordiosamente quanto de 
derecho y buena conciencia podieren facer segun la calidad del delito 
é infamia requiere é segund esto consultando con el rey nuestro sefior 
se vera si se debierd fazer gracia de los bienes 6 no. 

2. Otrosi si 4 estos que asi bien se vinieren 4 reconciliar son debidas 
algunas deudas, que los deudores sean obligados sin embargo del fisco 
& ge les pagar, y si algunas ventas de sus bienes ovieren fechas que 
valgan y que por parte del fisco del rey nuestro sefior no les sean 
impedidos, pero si estos tales tovieren esclavos cristianos que sean 
libres y forros, y si los ,hobieren vendido los que les compraren non 
los puedan retener mas que luego los dejen forros y ellos recauden el 
precio de los vendidores. 

3. Otros{ si aleunos de los susodichos que se vinieren 4 reconciliar 
y no dizieren la verdad de sus errores é de los que fueron particioneros 
con ellos é despues se fallaren por las probanzas el contrario, estos 
tales sean havidos por contumaces é que vinieron fingidos 4 la con- 
fesion, no gocen de nada de lo susodicho mas antes se proceda contra 
ellos con todo rigor segun que el derecho en tal caso dispone. 

4. Otrosi que ningun receptor debe sequestrar bienes de ningun 
herege nin apostata sin especial mandamiento en escrito de los inquisi- 
dores é que se pongan los tales bienes no en manos del receptor mas 
en manos de una persona fiable y que hagan el secuestro el receptor 
con el alguacil de la inquisicion y por delante de dos escribanos, uno 
del alguazil y otro del receptor, y estos escribanos cada una escriba 
por si todo lo que se sequestrare, y sean pagados los dichos escribanos 
de los bienes de los dichos hereges aunque despues se hayan de recon- 
ciliar, y el salario sea lo que los inquisidores mandaren. 

5. Otrosi si algunos fueren absentados antes del tiempo del edicto 
y asi mesmo absentaren sus bienes y estos tales vinieren en el tiempo 
del dicho edicto confesando sus errores como arriba dicho es, gocen 
de la misma gracia de los bienes é fagase con ellos en la misma forma 
que en el capitulo primero esta escrito, pero si en el tiempo del edicto 
non quisieren venir procedase contra ellos segun que en este caso el 
derecho dispone. 

6. Otrosf que ni por los procesos de los vivos se deben de dejar de 
facer los de los muertos é los que se fallaren aver seydo é muerto 
como herejes 6 judios los deben desenterrar para que se quemen y dar 
lugar al fisco para que occupe los bienes segun que de derecho se debe 
facer. 

7. Otrosf que el receptor no venda bienes ningunos ni reciba sin que 
esten dos escribanos delante, los quales sean puestos 6 por manos del 
rey nuestro sefior 6 de los inquisidores y cada uno dellos escriba el 
bienes que el receptor recibe y el precio por que los vende porque 
despues por aquellos libros se les tomardn las quentas. 


37 


578 APPENDIX 


8. Otrosi que 4 los inquisidores y oficiales que en este sancto negocio 
entienden les debe el receptor pagar sus tercios adelantados, porque 
tengan de comer y se les quiten la ocasion de recebir dadivas de ninguno 
y debe de comenzar el tiempo de su pago desdel dia que salieren de 
sus casas para entender en este sancto negocio. 

9. Otros{ que continuamente los inquisidores fagan saber al rey 
nuestro sefior é 4 mi todas las cosas que sucedieren en la dicha inquisi- 
cion é conoscieren que se deban escrevir, é que el receptor loego que por 
ellos le serd mandado pague el trotero que ellos quieran enviar. 

10. Otrosi que todos los mandamientos de qualquier calidad que 
sean que los inquisidores mandaren dar asi al alguazil como al receptor 
6 4 otras qualesquier personas manden 4 los escribanos de la inquisicion 
los asienten en sus registros porque por allf se conozea la verdad de 
todo lo que pasare. 

11. Otros{ que los inquisidores y el asesor esten Juntos y muy con- 
formes en la ejecucion de la justicia y buena administracion della y 
finalmente en todo quanto pertenece é se habra de facer en la inquisi- 
cion, de manera que ni el inquisidor sin el asesor ni el asesor sin el 
inquisidor faga cosa alguna, é si lo ficieren que por el mismo caso sea 
ninguno. 

12. Otrosi que esten los inquisidores é todos los oficiales de la inqui- 
sicion aposentados dentro de una casa, podiendose haber, porque esten 
juntamente é que quando ovieren de escrebir dichos negocios de la 
inquisicion é del estado della escriban los inquisidores y el asesor junta- 
mente. 

13. Otrosf que ningun oficial de la dicha inquisicion no tiene ningun 
derecho por cosa ninguna de su oficio pues que el rey nuestro sefior les 
manda dar su mantenemiento razonable y les fara mercedes andando 
el tiempo é faciendo ellos lo que deben é que no recivan dadivas ni 
subornaceones de ninguna persona y si se fallare que alguno el con- 
trario ficiere por el mismo caso sea privado del oficio y mas este 4 la 
pena que los inquisidores darle quisieren, é 4 un cada vez que un tal 
caso conteciere informen 4 su alteza del rey nuestro sefior porque se 
provea de otro oficial y entre tanto se ponga otro en lugar del tal delin- 
quente aquel que los inquisidores acordaren fasta que el rey nuestro 
sehor é yo proveamos. 

14. Otros que en todas las otras cosas que 4 la santa inquisicion se 
requieren queda 4 juicio y buena discrecion de los inquisidores que 
ellos las fagan segun Dios é derecho 6 buenas conciencias se deben 
facer, y si algunas otras cosas vieren que el rey nuestro sefior debe 
remediar las escriban y que se faran como cumple al servicio de Jesu- 
cristo nuestro sefior y ensalzamiento de su santa fé y buena edificacion 
de la cristiandad. 

Fr. THOMAS, prior et inquisitor generalis. 


DOCUMENTS 579 


Vi 
INSTRUCTIONS OF SEVILLE, 1500.% 


(Archivo General de Simancas, Consejo de la Inquisicion, Libro 933). 
(See p. 182). 


Otras Instituciones. 


Las capitulaciones infraescritas que ordinaron los muy reverendos 
Sefiores inquisidores generales para instruccion de los inquisidores é 
prosecucion del oficio de la sancta inquisicion en la muy noble é muy 
leal cibdad de Sevilla 4 diez é siete dias del mes de Junio afio de mil y 
quinientos. 

1. Primeramente que los inquisidores de cada una inquisicion é 
partido salgan é vayan 4 todos los lugares é villas de sus diocesis 
é partidos donde nunca fueron personalmente é en cada una de las 
dichas villas é lugares hagan é resciban los testigos de la general 
inquisicion, é para que esto puedan mejor hacer é mas brevemente se 
espida, se aparten los inquisidores é vaya cada uno por su parte con 
un notario del secreto para rescebir la dicha pesquisa é informacion 
general, é despues de rescibida é hecha la dicha pesquisa general se 
tornen 4 juntar en la cibdad 6 lugar donde tovieren su asiento para 
que alli vista por amos la testificacion que cada uno ha tomado puedan 
mandar prender 4 los que se hallaren culpados é testificados suficiente- 
mente para se poder prender segun se contiene en el capitulo de las 
instrucciones hechas en Toledo. 

2. Item, que en las inquisiciones donde los inquisidores han andado 
é recebido la general testificacion que cada afio el uno de los inquisi- 
dores salga por las villas y lugares 4 inquerir, poniendo sus edictos 
generales para los que algo saben tocante al crimen de la heregia que 
lo venga 4 decir, y el otro inquisidor quede 4 hacer los procesos que 4 
la sazon oviere, é sino abra algunos salga cada uno por su parte segun 
arriba esta dicho. 

3. Item, que los inquisidores de cada inquisicion pasen los libros 
ordinariamente por sus abecedarios dende el primero fasta el fin, para 
lo qual se ayuden del fiscal é notarios quando non andovieren por los 
lugares 4 tomar la testificacion como dicho es. 

Sobre esto capitulo se ha de hacer principal relacion en la visitacion 
de manera que han de saber los inquisidores generales que es lo que 
han procedido de los dichos abecedarios. 


1 Both the Granada edition of 1537 and Arguello print only the first four 
articles of these Instructions. Llorente describes them (Afiales, I, 261) as being 
in seven articles of which the last two are not in this original document. 


580 APPENDIX 


4, Item, por quanto los inquisidores algunas veces proceden por 
cosas livianas non continentes herexia derechamente y por la palabras 
que mas son blasfemias que herejias, 6 dichas con enojo 6 yra, que de 
aqui adelante no se prenden ningunos desta calidad, é si dubda oviere 
que lo consulten con los inquisidores generales. 

5. Item, quando prendieren alguno por el dicho crimen de herejia 
en poniendole la acusacion,envien la copia della 4 los inquisidores 
generales y la probanza que tienen contra el verba ad verbum decla- 
rando los nombres de los testigos y las calidades de las personas y esto 
envien con el nuncio de la inquisicion 4 buen recabdo. | 

6. Item, que los inquisidores non consientan dilacion en los procesos 
é procedan sumariamente segun la forma del derecho que en este caso 
de la herejia habla. 

7. Item, que los inquisidores de aqui adelante non dispensen con los 
que fueren condempnados a carcel perpetua ni les comuten la dicha 
carcel en otra penitencia é quando esta facultad de dispensar é comu- 
tar la dicha carcel los dichos inquisidores generales les reservan para si 
la dicha facultad é poder que ninguno otro pueda dispensar e comutar. 

8. Item, que 4 los testigos conpurgadores no les sean leidos los dichos 
é dipusciones de los testigos del crimen que hay contra el acusado en 
la acusacion del fiscal, sino que guarde la forma del derecho que es 
que el acusado ha de jurar juxta formam Juris que el [niega] el crimen 
de lo que esta asentado, ante los dichos testigos compurgadores, é que 
4 ellos se les pregunte si creen que juro verdad 6 no, sin hacerles otras 
preguntas. 

9. Item, los inquisidores trabajen con los procesados que estaran 
bien testificados para poder ser condempnados como hagan conosci- 
miento de su culpa y la confiesen y tengan arrepentimiento, trayendoles 
persuasiones para ello é si fuere menester que trayan personas religiosas 
que los conviertan é con los que asi no estovieren testiguados tengan 
tiento que no les fagan confesar lo que no hicieren. 

10. Item, que los inquisidores pregunten particularmente 4 los per- 
sonas que dieren sus confesiones lo que saben de sus padres y her- 
manos y parientes é de otras personas qualesquiera por las particu- 
laridades que se requieren porque despues no se puedan escusar por 
ignorancia, é lo que asi digeren de otros se asiente en los libros é 
registros de oficio aparte de las dichas confesiones. 


DOCUMENTS 581 


VI. 


EXTRACTS FROM THE REGISTER OF THE RECEIVER OF CONFISCATIONS 
AT VALENCIA, 1485-1486. 


(Archivo General de la Corona de Aragon, Registro 3684, fol. 60). 
(See p. 192). 


A veynte y dos de julio el Rey nuestro senyor me mandé6 que asen- 
tase en el registro como su Alteza facia merced 4 su caballerizo Johan 
de Hoz e 4 Martin Navarro su repostero de plata de sendas escrivanias 
de aquellas tres que estan vacas en Toledo porque han sido privados 
dellas por el delito de la heregia Pero Gia de Alcuba e Alfonso Cota 
e Francisco Rodriguez escrivanos de numero reconciliados. 

A diez y ocho de agosto de ochenta y cinco afios plugo al Rey nuestro 
sefior de librar 4 Johan de Tencino en los bienes de los herejes que 4 
su Alteza pertenescan 6 perteneceran de aqui en adelante en los reynos 
de Aragon aquellos diez mil sueldos de que le hizo merced en ayuda 
de su casamiento e aquellos seys mil seyscientos cincuenta y cinco 
sueldos ocho dineros que le son devidos de su quitacion con alvalaes 
de escribano de racion. Se mandé 4 mi que por memoria lo asentase 
en este registro. 

A veynte de Agosto de Lxxxv me mandé su Alteza que asentase en 
registro como faze merced 4 Pedro de Morales criado de Alfonso 
Carillo protonotario apostolico de una escrivania de las del numero 
que vacaran por el delicto de la heretica pravedad en Toledo. 

A xxir de enero en la villa de Alcalé fizo merced al doctor micer 
Felix Ponte regente la cancelleria de una alqueria que Jaime Martinez 
de Santangel tenia en el termino de cabe la ciudad de Valencia 
e mand6 4 mi que le fiziere la provision della. 

A xxiv de enero el Rey mi senyor fizo merced 4 Juan de Leca 
aposentador de su senyoria de uno de los primeros oficios que vacaran 
en Segovia por el reconciliacion 6 en otra manera por el delicto de la 
heretica pravedad. 

A xiv de febrero de Lxxxvi en Alcalé de Henares el Rey nuestro 
senyor me mandé que assentasse en registro como faze merced 4 Martin 
de Tavara de la scrivania del numero que tiene Pero Alfonso Cota 
reconciliado. 


582 APPENDIX 


VII. 
BrieEF oF Juuius Il RESPECTING THE TROUBLES IN CORDOVA. 


(Bulario de la Orden de Santiago, Libro III, fol. 320). 
(See p. 203). 


Venerabilis frater salutem etc. Non sine summa animi molestia 
percipimus quosdam iniquitatis filios Catholice fidei rebelles, qui cum 
Christiani sint Judaice se perfidize participes preestant, officiales a te 
ad inquirenda heretic pravitatis errata constitutos Cordube quorun- 
dam adminiculo complicum captivos fecisse et quod auditu quoque 
nefarium est mulctatos male et contumeliose habitos diu in vinculis 
detinuisse. Qu res cum pessimi prorsus et perniciosissimi sit exempli, 
pro cura que Catholici gregis ab hereticorum rabie defendendi una 
cum apostolatus officio nobis est demandata mature providendum 
duximus, ne lues tam pestifera serpat ulterius nec sua contagione 
rectos commaculat. Quam ob rem fraternitati tus cui jam pridie 
talia perquirendi facinora et reperta puniendi potestatem arbitriumque 
contulimus districte mandamus ut commissum sibi munus fervide et 
severe exerceat ac subnascentem in agro dominico zizaniam abolere 
et radicitus extirpare non cesset, fidelium defensioni ut par est die 
noctuque excubando. Prefatos vere qui tam abominandum scelus 
ausi sunt cum suis complicibus et quoscunque eis auxilium consilium 
favoremve ullum prestiterunt undique conquisitos ac debitis subjectis 
poenis exemplum ceteris statuet ne aliquando ad peccati similitudinem 
ex impunitate accendantur. Volumus autem hee omni diligentia 
quamprimum a fraternitate tua curari et offici, nam exorientia tabiferze 
pestis capita ne serpant in ipsis statim principiis sunt opprimenda, 
ad quod per ecclesiasticas censuras et universa juris remedia ut magis 
expedire videbitur, appellatione remota, procedes, in contrarium facien- 
tibus non obstantibus quibuscunque. Dat. Bononie.* 


1 The date of Bologna fixes the time of this brief between Nov. 10, 1506, when 
Julius II entered that city, and Feb. 22, 1507, when he left it—Raynald. Annal. 
ann. 1506, n. 30; 1507, n. 2. 


DOCUMENTS 583 


VIII. 


PROPOSITION MADE IN OCTOBER, 1519, TO CHARLES V TO CoMPOUND 
FOR THE CONFISCATIONS. 


(Archivo General de Simancas. Patronato Real, Inquisicion, Legajo 
‘ Yinico, fol. 49). 
(See p. 219). 


Sy en las cosas de la inquisicion se pone orden de justicia por jueces 
no sospechosos que guarden el derecho e den cuenta de lo que hicieren, 
para que los buenos puedan bevir seguros y los que mal bivieren sean 
castigados como nuestro muy santo padre lo ordenare e mandare e las 
bulas e breves que sobre ello dieren sean obedecidas e cumplidas como 
de justicia e conciencia no se puede otra cosa hazer, avra personas 
que osaran servir al Rey nuestro sefior en esta manera. 

Habida consideracion que la codicia de los bienes es causa de todos 
los malos, e que es ley en los reynos de Castilla en las partidas que 
no sean confiscados los bienes de los que tovieren hijos catolicos e que 
a los principes queda muy poco provecho de la confiscacion porque 
todo se gasta en salarios, costa de jueces e recebtores que de ello 
enriquecen, puede su Mag? justamente servirle por compusicion e 
venta que haga de todo el derecho que le pertinece a el e a sus deseen- 
dientes para syempre Jamas de la confiscacion de los bienes de la dicha 
inquisicion en todos sus reynos e sefiorios abiendo para ello bula de 
nuestro muy santo padre en que asi mismo se mande y ordene que no 
pueda aber condenacion de bienes ni dineros por via de penitencia ni 
en otra manera. Por lo qual y por lo que se debe hasta agora de las 
confiscaciones e penas e compusiciones pasadas por qualesquier per- 
sonas en qualquier manera—dando para ello las provisiones e jueces 
que fueron menester—se dara por esto a su Magestad quatrocientos 
mill ducados; los cien mill ducados de ellos para el tiempo de su partida 
al ymperio, e los trecientos mill en tres afios puestos en Flandes en 
las ferias de Emberes del mes de mayo de cada afio cien mill ducados. 

Y si paresciere algun inconveniente que esto se haga a perpetuo, 
aunque no le ay, abida consideracion a la dicha ley del reyno, y su 
Magestad fuere servido que sea por algun tiempo limitado, por el 
tiempo que fuere declarado por S. M. se daran doscientos mill ducados, 
los cinquenta mill para la partida e los ciento e cinquenta mill ducados 
en las dichas tres herias de enberes. 

E por que los jueces diputados para tan santo oficio estan mas libres 
para hacer justicia sin esperar de sostinerse de los bienes de los presos 
e su magestad no tenga que pagar salarios pues no ha de haber con- 
fiscacion demas de lo que asi se ha de dar por la dicha confiscacion se 


584 APPENDIX 


comprara larenta que fuere menester a vistae determinacion e modera- 
cion de su magestad para pagar todos los salarios e cosas de la dicha 
inquisicion sobre lo que ya esta comprado e consynado para ello en 
algunas partes, comprandolo de la manera e segund que el rey catolico 
lo tenya mandado e gomengado a comprar. 

E para la cobranza de lo susodicho se ha de dar otras tales cartas 
e provisiones como las que dio el rey catolico para cobrar las com- 
pusyciones del Andalucia e las que mas fuere menester, e para remediar 
qualquier agrabio que syntieren los que esto ovieren de pagar e proveer 
en ello e en la cobranga dello, lo que fuere necesario que se cometa al 
arzobispo de Toledo 0 a su gobernador para en los Reynos de la corona 
de Castilla, y el arzobispo de Caragoga para los reynos de la corona 
de Aragon, para que ellos o las personas a quien le cometieren conozcan 
de ello e lo provean syn pleyto, e no otros jJueces algunos, remota 
apelacion. : 

E abiendo efeto lo susodicho sy 8S. M. fuere servido de dar poderes e 
provisiones bastantes para cobrar e componer e ygualar todo lo que le 
es debido y pertenece en qualquier manera en los dichos sus reynos e 
sefiorios de qualquier otras confiscaciones e penas pertenecientes a la 
camera e fisco por las leyes e prematicas de los dichos reynos o en otra 
manera e qualesquier bienes que estan confiscados e adjudicados por 
delitos de que no este hecha merced e las tengan qualesquier personas 
de qualesquier tiempos pasados hasta en fin de este afio, y le pertene- 
' ciere de aqui adelante en estos quatro afios venideros que se cumplan 
en fin del afio de quinientos e veynte e tres, e que entre en esto lo que 
qualesquier personas de su voluntad vinieren, declarando que son en 
cargo, de que tengan finequito e no aya memoria ni recabdo por donde 
se le puede pedir quenta, e se puedan componer e cobrar lo que dieren, 
e por esto sanearan a 8. M. cien mil ducados pagados en la dichas tres 
ferias de enberes, e sy mas valiere lo susodicho sea para S. M. quitando 
las costas e el salario que S. M. fuere serbido de dar por ello, e que si 
aleuna merced o libranza se hiciere de bienes 6 maravedises en lo 
susodicho durante este tiempo se reciba en cuenta. 

E porque para el cumplimiento de todo lo susodicho se ha de dar 
seguridad bastante de personas que se obliguen a ello, se han de dar 
luego cedulas de S. M. libradas del S' Cardenal por donde de licencia 
e facultad a las personas que en ello quisieren entender e obligarse e 
contribuir, que lo puedan hazer syn que por ello incurran ni se les pida 
pena ni achaque alguno de parte de la ynquisicion ni por otras jus- 
ticias, las quales cedulas se han de dar en todo este mes de otubre, si 
los dineros han de estar prestos para la partida, porque de otra manera 
faltaria tiempo. 


DOCUMENTS 585 


1B 
MEMORIAL FROM GRANADA TO CHARLES V IN 1526. 


(Archivo de Simancas, Patronato Real, Inquisicion, Legajo tinico, 
fol. 55). 
* (See p. 222). 


Vuestra Magestad manda é 4 mandado poner la Sancta Inquisicion 
en esta Ciudad y Reyno de Granada, lo qual es muy loable y muy santo 
por que se vea de creer que la intencion y voluntad de Vuestra Mages- 
tad es que los malos christianos sean castigados y los bonos sean cono- 
cidos, y por que en la manera de proceder en el Sancto Officio pasan 
mas peligros los que buenos son que los que mal biben, asy de ser 
presos como condenados sin culpa segun que muchas veces a acaecido, 
todos los que bien biben y son catolicos christianos suplican a 
Vuestra Magestad mande enmendar la manera de proceder en que 
los testigos y carceles sean publicos como lo son en el pecado abom- 
inable y contra natura, que como en este son conocidos y castigados los 
malos asy lo seran en este otro, y los que son buenos y biben bien 
estaran seguros de ser acusados falsemente, y por que Vuestra Mages- 
tad use de tan justa peticion y misericordia con los que buenos son, 
de solo este pequefio Reyno de granada, serviran a Vuestra Magestad 
con cinquenta mill ducados para los gastos de este tan sancto viage 
sin lo que mas Vuestra Magestad podra aver de los otros sus Reynos 
y Sefiorios que sera en grandisima suma de dinero, y quitando este 
mucho secreto escusera Vuestra Magestad los incombenientes de peca- 
dos siguientes. 

Lo primero que si los jueces son malos como puede acaecer por ser 
hombres humanos y no Santos como lo es el Officio, quando prenden 
doncellas y casadas de buenos Justos y mocas, 6 quando las mandan 
venir secretamente ante si como el Officio requiere en su mano sepan 
usar de ellos como cosa suya, lo qual ligeramente ya sentiran con el 
gran temor que lleban, y esto no habra lugar de se hacer en juicio 
publico. . 

Y la otra, que los escribanos de este secreto y los officiales que en 
este secreto tienen mano, seyendo mancebos, como en algunas partes 
lo son, tienen 6 casi han de hacer lo misma con hijas 6 mugeres 6 
parientas de presos, las quales ligeramente puedan alcanzar, y les 
sera concedido por saber algo de este secreto que les combenga, 6 sf 
fuesen malas personas como entre los hombres se hallan, tambien 
tienen ocasion de bender por dineros este secreto, por que los que asy 
son malos con fin de ser aprovechados procuran estos officios, lo qual 
todo se quita con hacer la justicia publica. 

En lo otro tienen a causa de este secreto que muchas animas que 


586 APPENDIX 


se han condenado al ynfierno e se pueden condenar por ser tan falsas, 
escusarseles a este camino, que por poder decir lo que dicen secreto 
muy ligeramente se condenan y dicen lo que no vieron por aver ven- 
ganza de quien tienen mala voluntad como cada dia a sucedido, sy 
quando Dios le hace merced al falsamente acusado que se da por 
bueno sale destruydo demas de la infamia de su prision, lo qual se 
escusaria seyendo los testigos publicos. 

E lo otro que para que el que falsamente se acusa no tenga remedio, 
puedense buscar los testigos por dineros, los quales por estos pecados 
se hallan oy con poco trabajo, y como el acusado no los conosca y lo 
que le acusan nunca hiso ni penso no puede caer en los acusadores, y 
aunque cayga en su enemigo contrario que lo hiso atestiguar, y como 
los jueces no sepan este secreto condenan justamente y el falsamente 
acusado muere sin culpa, y quedan sus hijos y debdos infamados para 
siempre jamas, lo qual no se podria hacer seyendo publicos los testigos. 

E lo otro que como los que son malas personas y malos cristianos 
tengan y tienen odio y mala voluntad 4 los que son buenos porque no 
siguen sus malos costumbres y obras: diz que por sus delitos son presos 
y los confiesan; los primeros que acusan son los que saben que biben 
bien, por vengarse de ellos, y 4 estos les da lugar el secreto, que si 
publico lo obieren de decir no tendrian osadia de decir la mentira 4 la 
clara, por que se les probaria luego el contrario, y por este tienen 
menos seguridad los buenos que los malos, que como no hicieron ni 
pensaron lo que les acusan ni conoscan por platica ni conversacion 4 
los acusadores ni por ventura saben sus nombres no pueden caer ni 
acertar en ellos, y desta manera son condenados justamente y mueren 
sin culpa por que no quieren conocer lo que no hicieron, y quedan 
destruydos sus hijos y debdos y disfamados, los quales seyendo los 
testigos publicos no se podria hacer. 

E lo otro que 4 cabsa de este secreto mas facilmente se pueden librar 
los que han cometido el delicto de que son acusados, por que el que 
lo hizo bien sabe quando y como y ante quien, y luego pueden acertar 
en quien lo acusa, y tachandolo como se hace es dado por libre, y la 
sentencia es Justa, y el culpado queda sin castigo. Lo qual es por el 
contrario a quel que falsamente se le acusa, que como no lo hizo ni sabe 
ni puede saber de donde le viene el dafio, sino fuere por inspiracion 
divina, de la qual gracia no son dignas todas, pe . . . y de esta 
manera pasan mucho mas riesgo y peligro . . . queson buenos y 
catolicos cristianos que los que . . . y biben mal, en lo qual de 
Vuestra Magestad . . . poner este tan justo remedio que se le 
. . . tiene puesto de su mano para la gobernacion ... y 
Sefiorios, por que los buenos puedan biber . . . ser malos sean 
conocidos y castigados.* 


1 The end of the document is torn. 


DOCUMENTS 587 


X. 


Buu or Srxtus IV, Aprit 18, 1482, TemMporariILy REFORMING THE 
INQUISITION OF ARAGON. 
(See p. 234). 


(Archivio Vaticano, Sisto IV, Regesto 674, T. XV, fol. 366). 


Sixtus Episcopus servus servorum Dei Ad perpetuam rei memoriam. 
Gregis Dominici nostre custodie divina disponente clementia com- 
missi vigilem et solicitam curam gerentes, Pastoris inherendo vestigiis 
libenter juxta officii nostri debitum nostra solicitudinis partes adhibe- 
mus ut errantes, relicto precipiti tenebrarum devio, viam veritatis 
agnoscant, et per illam gradientes vitam consequantur eternam; per- 
severantes vero in eorum erroribus proditis contra eos a jure remediis 
compescantur, nec damnentur aliqui de quorum erroribus legitimis 
probationibus non constaret. Sane nuper nobis insinuatum extitit 
quod in Aragonie et Valentise ac Maioricarum Regnis, necnon Princi- 
patu Cataloniz officitum inquisicionis hzretice pravitatis non zelo 
fidei et salutis animarum sed lucri cupiditate ab aliquo tempore citra 
exercetur et quamplurimi veri et fideles Christiani illo mediante, 
admissis contra eos inimicorum, semulorum, servorum aliarumque 
vilium et minus ydonearum personarum, probationibus nullis legitimis 
preecedentibus indicibus, carceribus etiam seecularium jJudicum detru- 
dentur, torquentur, heretici etiam et relapsi declarantur, bonis et 
beneficiis spoliantur et traduntur curie szculari et per illam ultimo 
supplicio afficiuntur in animarum periculum, perniciosum exemplum 
et scandalum plurimorum. Nos igitur multorum querelis super hoc 
excitati, providere volentes ut tenemur quod officium ipsum debite 
peragatur et illo mediante nullus opprimatur indebite et injuste, 
Motu proprio, non ad alicujus nobis super hoc oblate petitionis 
instantiam, sed de nostra mera deliberatione et ex certa nostra scientia, 
auctoritate apostolica, preesentium tenore statuimus quod de czetero 
in Regnis et Principatu preedictis locorum Ordinarii seu eorum vicarii 
et officiales ac ejusdem heretic pravitatis inquisitores in eorum 
civitatibus et dicecesibus deputati conjunctim dumtaxat juxta tenorem 
aliarum litterarum nostrarum contra Christianos Judaicz supersti- 
tionis sectatores et ad illorum ritus transeuntes illosque Judaizando 
sectantes ac alios hereticos quoscunque eorumque receptatores et 
fautores etiam super jam cceptis negotiis procedere et accusatorum et 
denuntiatorum et promoventium hujusmodi inquisitionis negotium, 
necnon testium quos desuper ad juramenta et dicta recipi continget, 
nomina et attestationes ac dicta totumque eorum processum personis 
ipsis ac earum procuratoribus et defensoribus publicare et aperire ac 


588 APPENDIX. 


eis ad opponendum contra eosdem testes eorumque dicta et attesta- 
tiones et processuum hujusmodi competentem dilationem inspectis 
testium numero et actorum qualitate moderandam assignare, et 
illis contra quos procedi continget eos quos petierint in advocatos 
et procuratores dare et per ipsas personas inquisitas ac eorum nomine 
comparentes oppositas in termino hujusmodi legitimas exceptiones et 
defensiones ac desuper legitimas probationes admittere. Ipsique 
insimul vel alter eorum ad minus per seipsos secundum Juris dispo- 
sitionem testes ad Juramenta recipere et examinare debeant et aliter 
receptorum et examinatorum attestationes, nullum penitus etiam 
judicium vel adminiculum faciant in preemissis, nec detineantur per- 
sonz alique occasione negotil inquisitionis hujusmodi in alio quam 
solito Ordinariorum locorum carcere, ad hoc etiam de jure deputato. 


Et si contingat a gravaminibus eis illatis ad Sedem Apostolicam 


appellari, Ordinarii, vicarii et officiales et inquisitores prefati appella- 
tionibus ipsis deferant venerenter dum tamen manifeste frivole non 
fuerint, et processus per eos habitos ad ejusdem Sedis examen remittere 
et in illis supersedere nullatenus differant, usquequo aliud ab eadem 
Sede habuerint in mandatis. Contrafacientes vero Ordinarii, vicarii 
et Officiales ac Inquisitores preefati et quicunque alii tam ecclesiastici 
quam seculares cujuscunque status, gradus, ordinis et conditionis 
fuerint, quacunque ecclesiastica vel mundana dignitate preefulgentes 
et contrafierl procurantes consulentes vel suadentes, tacite vel expresse, 
directe vel indirecte, in premissis per nos sicut prefertur provide 


statutis vel aliquo eorumdem, Episcopi et superiores interdicti ingressus 


ecclesie, reliqui vero excommunicationis sententiam eo ipso incurrant, 
a qua preterquam in mortis articulo constituti ab alio quam Romano 
Pontifice, etiam vigore cujuscunque facultatis de preesentibus men- 
tionem non facientis, nequeant absolutionis beneficium obtinere. Et 
illius exemplo cujus vices gerimus in terris nolentes mortem peccan- 
tium sed cupientes potius conversionem eorum salutiferam, misereri 


potius quam ulcisci elegimus, preesertim ubi si alias procedatur exinde 
possint verisimiliter scandala exoriri, Ordinariis locorum et eorum 


vicariis et Officialibus generalibus ac Inquisitoribus prefatis et 


cuilibet eorum in omnibus Regnis, Principatu et dominiis supradictis 


ut quorumcunque Regnorum et Principatus preedictorum incolarum 
utriusque sexus ad aliquem ex eis recurrentium confessione diligenter 
audita pro quibuscunque excessibus criminibus et peccatis etiam que 
vitam et ritus ac mores Judaicos sectando aut alias a via veritatis et 
fide Catholica deviando, et in aliquem heresim labendo usque in diem 
illam in qua confitebuntur commississe fatebuntur et censuras eccle- 
siasticas quas quomodolibet incurrissent auctoritate nostra in utroque 
foro poenitentiali et contentioso absque abjuratione de absolutionis 
beneficio eisdem recurrentibus providendi eisque pcenitentiam salu- 
tarem et occultam injungendi motu, scientia et auctoritate pradictis 


DOCUMENTS 589 


facultatem et potestatem concedimus per presentes. Ita quod in 
posterum preetextu criminis heresis quam antea incurrisse dicerentur 
contra eos inquirere non possint nec eos nullatenus valeant molestari, 
dum tamen ad Inquisitionis processum super hujusmodi criminibus 
et inquisitorum personalem citationem executorii demandatam deven- 
tum non foret, ac Ordinarlis, vicariis, Officialibus et Inquisitorfbus 
preedictis ne contra illos quos eorumdem vel alicujus eorum assertione 
els constiterit per aliquem ex eisdem vigore presentium absolutos 
fuisse per ipsorum absolventium attestationem aut patentes literas, 
seu super eorum assertione confectum instrumentum, absque tamen 
ulla peccatorum quorum confessionem audivissent propalatione de 
commissis per eosdem confitentes criminibus heresis cujuslibet, de 
novo procedere, aut confiteri modo predicto volentes quominus id 
faciant impedire, nullatenus prasumant sub simili interdicti et ex- 
communicationis sententia eo ipso ut prefertur incurrenda a qua pari 
modo nequeant ab alio quam Sede preedicta nisi in mortis articulo 
constituti absolutionis beneficium obtinere, eisdem motu scientia et 
auctoritate inhibemus. Eisdemque Ordinariis, Vicariis, Officialibus 
et Inquisitoribus sic absolventibus ac cuilibet eorum, motu, scientia 
et auctoritate predictis, sub simili poena mandamus quatinus per se 
vel alium seu alios presentes litteras ubi quando et quociens expedire 
cognoverint solemniter publicantes et illis quibus de absolutionis 
beneficio hujusmodi providerint ac alios quos contra presentium 
tenorem gravari quomodolibet constiterit efficaci defensionis preesidio 
assistentes non permittant quempiam contra eorumdem presentium 
literarum tenorem vexari seu quomodolibet molestari, et illos quos 
eis interdicti et excommunicationis sententiam hujusmodi incurrisse 
constiterit, illos irretitos esse publice nuncient faciantque ab aliis 
nunciari et ab omnibus arctius evitari ac, legitimis super hiis habendis 
servatis processibus, illos iteratis vicibus aggravare procurent. Et 
insuper, motu et scientia similibus, Ordinariis eorumque vicariis et 
Officialibus ac Inquisitoribus predictis, sub censuris et poenis preefatis 
eo ipso incurrendis, mandamus quatinus incolas utriusque sexus 
Regnorum et Principatus preedictorum qui ad eos aut eorum quem- 
libet pro confessione et absolutione preedictis recurrerint absque 
aliqua dilatione seu mora eorum confessiones et cujuslibet eorum 
audiant et eis de absolutionis beneficio in utroque foro ut preefertur 
provideant, contradictores per censuram ecclesiasticam appellatione 
postposita compescendo, invocando ad hoc si opus fuerit auxilio brachii 
seecularis, decernentes ex nunc omnes et singulos processus quos 
haberi et generaliter quicquid fieri vel attemptari contigerit contra 
presentium tenorem quomodolibet nullius esse roboris vel momenti 
et haberi debere prorsus pro infectis. Non obstantibus apostolicis in 
provincialibus et sinodalibus conciliis editis constitutionibus et ordina- 
tionibus ac privilegiis et litteris dictze Sedis, necnon ecclesiarum Reg- 


590 APPENDIX 


norum et Principatus predictorum ac curiarum eorumdem juramento 
confirmatione apostolica vel quavis alia firmitate roboratis, statutis et 
consuetudinibus ac stilo et observantiis quibus illa etiamsi de eis 
eorumque toto tenore seu quovis alio expressio habenda esset, preesen- 
tibus pro expressis habentes, illis alias in suo robore permansuris, 
quoad premissa specialiter expresse derogamus contrariis quibus- 
cunque. Seu si aliquibus communiter vel divisim a Sede preefata indul- 
tum existat aut interdici suspendi vel excommunicari non possint per 
litteras Apostolicas non facientes plenam et expressam ac de verbo ad 
verbum de indulto hujusmodi mentionem, et qualibet alia dict Sedis 
indulgentia generali vel speciali cujuscunque tenoris existat, per quam 
presentibus non expressam vel totaliter non insertam effectus earum 
impediri valeat quomodolibet vel differri, et de qua cujusque toto 
tenore habenda sit in nostris litteris mentio specialis. Et quia difficile 
foret preesentes litteras ad singula loca deferri, volumus et apostolica 
auctoritate decernimus quod transumpto preesentium manu alicujus 
notarii publici subscripto et sigillo alicujus curise episcopalis munito 
ubique in judicio et extra tanta fides adhibeatur quanta ipsis original- 
ibus litteris adhiberetur si ille exhibite vel ostensze forent. Nulli ergo 
etc. liceat hance paginam nostrorum statuti, concessionis, inhibitionis, 
mandati, constitutionis, derogationis, decreti et voluntatis infringere 
vel ei ausu temerario contraire. Si quis autem etc. Datum Rome 
apud Sanctum Petrum, Anno Incarnationis Dominice Millesimo Quad- 
ringesimo octuagesimo secundo, Quarto decimo Kal. Maii, Pontificatus 
Nostri Anno Undecimo. 
P. BERTRANDI. D. DE VITERBIO. 

Duplicata sub eadem data et scripta per eundem scriptorem et 

taxata ad xxx. 


Dae 
King Frerpinanp To Pore Sixtus IV, May 13, 1482. 


(Archivo General de la Corona de Aragon, Reg. 3684, fol. 7). 
(See p. 235). 


Sanctissime Pater: Ferdinandus ete. Aliqua fuerunt mihi relata, 
pater sancte, que si vera sunt maxima admiratione digna videntur: 
hec sunt quod sanctitas vestra concessit generalem remissionem neo- 
phytis de omnibus erroribus seu delictis per eos ante hac perpetratis 
provideritque ut nomina testium qui apud acta inquisitionum heretice 
pravitatis que nunc fiunt in provincia Aragonie testimonia perhibue- 
runt delatis revelentur et quod a sententia inquisitionis possit ad 


DOCUMENTS 591 


vestram sanctitatem appelari seu apostolicam sedem et etiam quod 
sanctitas vestra revocaverit ab ipsius inquisitionis officio scilicet 
Joanni Christoforo de Gualbis et fratrem Joannem Ort exaudiendo 
eorum neophitorum peticiones quibus etiam audientia deneganda est, 
postquam inquisitores ipsi modeste et decenter prosequuntur, aliter 
enim spectantes alios favorabiles et faciles sibi optinere inquisitores, 
et alia aS. V. impetrata indulta talem suscipiunt audaciam quod non 
timent in eorum erroribus persistere. Predicte autem relationi impen- 
dimus fidem nullam, quod talia visa sunt quod nullatenus concedenda 
erant per 8. V. que hujusmodi sancte inquisitionis negotium dirigere 
debet. Et si per dictorum neophitorum importunas et astutas per- 
suasiones ea concessa forsitan fuerint eis nunquam locum dare intendo. 
Caveat igitur 8. V. contra dicti negotii prosequtionem quicquid impedi- 
menta concedere et si quid concessum fuerit revocare et de nobis 
ipsius negotii cura confidere non dubitare. Sed postquam S. V. aperte 
novit quantum cedit imo preter astutisimas neophitorum circuitiones 
opus est in Dei servitium et cristiane fidei decus quod inquisitores 
heretice pravitatis secundum beneplacitum et voluntatem meam in 
his regnis et terris meis instituantur et regio meo favore freti onus 
inquisitionis exerceant et hoc quidem modo ea que agenda sint perfici 
possunt et aliter nihil bene ageretur circa ea quod facile quidem intel- 
legi potest ex hoc quam superioribus temporibus dum de ejusmodi 
negotiis ego aut predecessores mei non nos intromittimus heretica 
pravitas in tantum succurruit et ejusmodi morbi contagio per cris- 
tianum gregem se extendit quod quamplurimi qui pro cristianis habe- 
bantur non modo non cristiane sed neque secundum legem aliquam 
vivere reperti sunt et multa que ab illis in Cristi neglectum et vilipen- 
dium fiebant aperta sunt et in dies efundentur in publicum que ita 
proh dolor eveniunt culpa atque nequitia inquisitorum preteritorum 
qui munibus et corruptelis ab inquisitionibus desistebant aut eas 
minus bene prosequebantur. Dignetur iccirco eadem 8. V. hic mihi 
concedere circa inquisitiones predictas videlicet quod sanctitas vestra 
quamprimum confirmet predictos fratrem Joannem Cristoforum de 
Gualbes et fratrem Joannem Orts in dicto inquisitionis officio con- 
firmetque eadem S. V. comisionem ad meam instantiam nuper factam 
per magistratus ordinis fratrum predicatorum fratri Gaspari Jutglar 
conventus illerdensis super instituendis et destituendis inquisitoribus 
in dicta provincia secundum beneplacitum et voluntatem meam. 
Aut si melius videbitur S. V. alicui alteri fratri similem comisionem 
faciat ut semper inquisitores nobis acceptos in dicta provincia habea- 
mus, quoniam alios contra voluntatem nostram hujusmodi offictum 
exercere nunquam permitere intendimus. Ita cum hec omnia fieri 
expedit pater sancte in obsequium Cristi et catholice fidei decus jubeat 
ergo Sanctitas vestra apostolicas provisiones et literas super predicta 
ilico expediri quod erit mihi vehementer gratum accipiamque singu- 


592 APPENDIX 


laris beneficii loco ab eadem Sanctitate vestra cujus almam personam 
Jesus optimus maximus feliciter et cum sacre Eclesie columna tueatur. 
Ex Corduba urbe x11 die maii a nativitate Domini mMccccLxxxul. De 
vuestra santidat muy omil e devoto fijo que vuestros santos pies y 
manos besa el Rey de Castilla y de Aragon. Camanyus secretarius. 


D.GUE. 


MEMORIA DE DIVERSOS AUTOS DE INQUISICION CELEBRADOS EN QARA- 
GOGA DESDE EL ANO 1484 ASTA EL DE 1502 EN QUE SE REFIEREN 
LAS PERSONAS CASTIGADAS EN ELLOS.’ 

(See p. 244). 


Los serenisimos Reyes catholicos don fernando y dofia Isavel man- 
daron poner en Caragoga el sacrosanto tribunal de la fe en el afio de 
1484. Lo mismo en Catalonia y Valencia. 

Fue el primero Inquisidor Apostolico El Maestro Julian de la orden 
de Predicadores al qual se entiende que mataron los Judios atossi- 
gandole en unas rosquillas que le presentaron. [El Glorioso Maestro 
Pedro Arbues de Epila llamado vulgarmente el Maestre Epila, fue 
muerto por los conversos estando en los maytines de media noche en 
la seo de Caragoga, de donde era canonigo a 17 de 7>r de 1485. 


1 This MS. I procured from a bookseller in Madrid, and I know nothing of its 
provenance. It isin small quarto, with 62 unnumbered pages of a handwriting 
which I should attribute to the seventeenth or early eighteenth century; about 
three pages towards the middle are in a different hand, with some blanks filled 
in by the scribe of the rest of the MS., as though the copying had been entrusted 
to a second writer who had proved unable to decypher the original. The record 
bears on its face every mark of authenticity. There are occasional discrepancies 
in names and dates between it and the list at the end of the Libro Verde, but in 
general they correspond, as it also does with such trials of the period as I have ex.. 
amined from the Llorente MSS. in the Bibliothéque Nationale. It supplies much 
that is lacking, and the abstracts of the sentences of the murderers of San Pedro 
Arbués are sufficient to render it a document of interest, besides the light which 
the sentences in general throw upon the business of the Inquisition. I tran- 
scribe in full the earlier portion, with the final “‘Resumen.”’ Of the remainder, 
which consists of little more than lists of names of convicts and penitents, I 
only give a summary. 

The MS. has much in common with the anonymous Origen de la Inquisicion 
cited by Llorente (Afiales, I, 76, 94, 114, etc.) which he says is in the Academia 
de la Historia and was written in 1652. 


DOCUMENTS 593 


AUTOS DE FE DEL ANO 1484. 


Auto primero. A 10 de Mayo de 1484, domingo, se hizo auto de fe en 

1484. la seo de Caragoga. Predico el Inquisidor el Maestro 
Julian y fueron sacados en el los siguientes. 

1. Primero, Leonora Eli por ceremonias Judaycas, y quando 
oya nombrar del SS.™° nombre de Jesus respondia, called 
no le nombreys que es nombre de enforcado. 

2. Felipe Salvador alias Santicos botiguero por ceremonias 
Judaycas, comer carne en viernes, y en la quaresma, este 
fue primo hermano de Pedro de la Cabra Judio. 

3. Leonor Catorce Valenciana, muger del dicho Santicos, por 
ceremonias Judaycas, comer Amin’ y carne en viernes y 
savado y aver ayunado el ayuno de Quipur. 

4. Isavel Mufioz Castellana, por los mismos delitos y que 
quando dezia el credo, y llegava 4 aquellas palabras et in 
Jesum Christum, dena Aqui cayo el asno. 

Todos estos Peron penitenciados por hereges y confiscadas 
sus haziendas. 

Auto 2. A 3 de Junio, en el patio de la casa del Arzobispo, predico el 

Santo martyr Pedro Arbues, fueron condenados a muerte, 

1, 2. Dos hombres por hereges wideeanis el uno dellos fue 
aogado porque murio reducido. 

3. Aldonza de Perpifian, muger de Manuel de Almazan, por 
ceremonias de Judios, y aver bestido a doze pobres Judios 
en honor de las doze tribus de Israel, algunos afios, Ayunar 
el Quipur y dar limosna a la cedaza, quemaronla en 
estatua por ser difunta. 

Auto 3. A 20 de Diziembre, Biernes, A las espaldas del hospital de 
1485. nuestra sefiora del Portillo. Predico el Prior de Predica- 
| dores, fueron quemados 

1. Alvaro de Segovia por ceremonias Judaycas, comer Amin y 
carnes degolladas en sus ritos, y en quaresma, Ayunar el 
Quipur, leer la Biblia en hebreo bajo de un pabellon, y 
despues la hazia adorar a sus hijos—quemado. 

2. Joana Sinfa porque de Judia hecha Cristiana volvio a los 
ritos Judaycos y vivia como Judia,—quemada. 

Auto 4. A treze de febrero. En la seo. Predico el Maestro Crespo y 
1486. sacaron en el tablado a 

1. Jayme la Gasca con una bela ardiendo en las manos por 
ceremonias Judaycas. No le confiscaron los bienes por 
aver confessado dentro del tiempo. 


1 Amin was a kind of Jewish broth. In the trial of Juan de la Caballeria, in 
1488, there is an allusion to ‘“hamin y otras potages de Judios.’”-—MSS. Bib. Nat. 
de Paris, fonds espagnol, 81. 

38 


594 APPENDIX 


Auto 5. A 24 de febrero, Biernes, en nuestra sefora del Portillo. 
1486. Predico el Maestro Crespo, canonigo del Pilar. Sacaron 
en el a 

1. Salvador Esperandeu el viejo zurrador, porque siendo Cris- 
tiano hizo ceremonias Judaycas, comio Amin, y Pan cotazo,* 
y carne en la quaresma, guardava el savado, y travajava 
el domingo, ayunava el Quipur, y escarnecia al querpo de 
nuestro sehor Jesu Cristo—fue quemado. 

2. Gumien Berguero, siendo cristiano hizo todas las ceremonias 
de Judios y llevava abito de Rabi, fue quemado. 

3. Ysavel de embon, muger de Gilabert Desplugas, siendo 
cristiana dava azeyte a la sinagoga, y hazia ceremonias 
Judaycas—fue quemada. 

4, Dionis Ginot, notario, por casado dos veces viviendo la 
primera muger, y fugitivo—quemado en estatua. 

5. Pedro Navarro mercader, por ceremonias Judaycas y escar- 
necer el santisimo sacramento, y fugitivo—quemado en 
estatua. 

6. Maestro Martinez, jurista de Teruel por ceremonias Judaycas 
y aver quebrantado su’ carcel y huydose—quemado en 
estatua. 

Auto 6. A 17 de Julio [Marzo] Biernes, en nuestra sefiora del Portillo, 
1486. Predico el Maestro Crespo, y sacaron al tablada a 

1. Francisco Clemente notario por ceremonias Judaycas, 
quemado. 

2. A su muger por lo mismo, quemada. 

3. Miguel de Oliban capatero por ceremonias y manjares 
Judaycos, y porque dezia que el buen Judio se podia salvar 
en su ley como el buen cristiano en la suya, y que la de 
Moysen era buena, y que nunca avia creydo en la §.™ 
Trinidad ni en la Virgen nuestra sefiora Maria 8.™, fue 


quemado. 
Auto 7. Biernes a 28 de Abril, en el mismo lugar. Predico el Maestro 
1486. Crespo. Fueron castigados los que se siguien. 


1. Pedro de Orrea, mercader, por ceremonias Judaycas, y 
averse hecho circuncidar y quando beja la cruz o el SS.™° 
Sacr.'° se escondia por no benerarlos—fue quemado. 

2. Anton de Pomar Berguero, por ceremonias Judaycas, y 
siendo cristiano no savia el Paternoster ni el credo—fue 
quemado. 

3. Francisco Tornabal pelayre por Relapso, y casado con dos 
mugeres veladas—quemado. 


1 Unleavened bread—‘‘panem azmum sive cotaco comedendo’’—Trial of Bea- 
trix de la Cavalleria, MSS. Bib. Nat. de France, fonds espagnol, 80, fol. 175. 


DOCUMENTS 595 


4. Maestro Puremiofer [Pedro Monfort], Vicario general de 
Caragoca, por aver venido contra la Inquisicion en Mal- 
lorca y Qaragoga y dezir que el buen Judio se podia salbar 
como el buen cristiano, y entre los Judios jurava por la ley 
de Moysen y por los diez mandamientos, y dezirles que 
tenian buena y santa ley—quemado en estatua. 

5. Mossen Pedro Mafios cavallero, que siendo cristiano se paso 
a las ceremonias Judaycas—quemado en estatua. 

6. Manuel de Almazan mercader, por ceremonias Judaycas, 
comer Amin y Arrequequer y dar limosna a la cedaza y 
pagar a un Rabi porque le fuesse a leer la ley de Moysen— 
fue quemado. 

Auto 8. Domingo de la S™ Trinidad a 21 de Mayo, dentro de la seo. 
1486. Predico el Maestro Martin Garcia Inquisidor, sacaron a 

1. Joan Cid, sastre por ceremonias Judaycas, fue penitenciado 
y confiscados los bienes. 

2. Rodrigo Gris, carnicero, que siendo cristiano hazia cere 
monias de Judios, y el Jueves S® se harto de Gazapos. 

3. Jayme Redo, comia carnes en biernes 8”. 

4, Joan de Alcala, portero del Justicia de Aragon, por cere- 
monias Judaycas, y comer carne en quaresma, caso dos 
veces en vida de la primera muger. 

. Gilabert Desplugas, por ceremonias Judaycas. 

. Jayme de Caseda, corredor, por lo mismo. 

. Anton Matheo, Botiguero, por comer carne en quaresma y 
gallinas en Viernes S y darles la bendicion a sus hijos 
passandoles la mano por la cara. 

Todos estos fueron penitenciados. 

Auto 9. A 25 de Junio Biernes en la seo. Predico el Maestro Martin 
1486. Garcia, fueron penitenciados por hereges los siguientes. 

1. Jayme Navarro mercader, por ayunos y ceremonias de 
Judios, yr a la sinagoga 4 orar, dezir que si Cristo n. S'. 
fuera dios no temiera el morir. 

2. Felipe de Moros, mesonero de la Almunia, porque se caso 
con dos mugeres vivas, ceremonias de Judios, y aver 
llevado 4 ganar torpemente una muger cristiana. 

3. Clara Mateo, muger de Alvaro de Segovia, por ceremonias 
Judaycas y dezir que no estava nuestro Salvador en la 
ostia, y que no dezia verdad en la confession porque creya 
que todo era burla sino la ley de Moysen. 

4. Leonor Romeo muger de Anton Mateo, ceremonias Juday- 
cas. 

5. Joan de Aragon, botiguero, en cuerpo y con bela en el 
tablado, por que tuvo conbiados a unos Judios, y dezia 
Cristianos de natura, Cristianos de mala ventura, y que 


“I o> Or 


596 APPENDIX 


mas valia dar A ganar al medico Judio que al Cristiano, y 

por sospechoso en la fe. 
Auto 10. A 30 de Junio, Biernes, en la puerta de la Seo, predico el 
1486. Inquisidor Abad de Aguilar, fueron condenados a muerte 

1. Joan de Pero Sanchez mercader, que dijo a Joan de la Badia. 
que si matara al Inq” Maestro Epila le daria 500 florines de 
oro, y mas dijo a Gaspar de Santa Cruz y a Mateo Ram 
en casa de Juan de Esperandeu, y delante dellos encargo 
a Vidau frances que matasse al Inquisidor que el se lo 
pagaria muy bien, porque era tesorero del dinero que 
tenian para defenderse los Judios, y porque Judayzava y 
dezia que la mejor ley era la de Moysen, y que maldijo a, 
su padre por averse tornado cristiano. Arastraron su 
estatua con una bolsa al cuello por Caragoca y despues la 
quemaron en el mercado. 

2. Joan de Esperandeu Zurrador por assesino de la misma 
muerte y porque un savado fue con Vidal frances y Mateo 
Ram a la Reja del estudio del Maestre Epila para arran- 
calla, y no lo executaron porque fueron descubiertos, y 
passados 4 0 cinco meses fueron a la seo a Maytines tras 
del dicho Inquisidor y allandole arrodillado entre el altar 
mayor y el coro, esperandeo, durango frances, Ram y 
Abadia, dijo este al Vidau, dale que este es, y el Vidau le 
dio una cuchillada de rebes, que le abrio desde la cerviz 
asta la barba, y esperandeu le dio una estocada que le 
paso el brazo izquierdo, este era fino Judio y circuncidado, 
y lo arrastraron vivo y delante de la puerta mayor de la 
seo le cortaron los dos manos, y de alli le llebaron arras- 
trando al mercado y en la horca le cortaron la cabeza y 
le hizieron quartos y las manos las enclavaron en la puerta 
pequefia de la diputacion, y los quartos por los caminos. 

3. Vidau durango frances zurrador, criado de Esperandeu con- 
fesso que avia ydo muchas vezes a casa de Gaspar de 
Santa Cruz y de Pero Sanchez y como ellos y Sancho de 
Paternoy trataban la muerte del Inquisidor, y como le 
allaron arrodillado los dichos Vidau y Mateo Ram, esperan- 
deu y la badia y otros que el no conocio porque yvan con 
mascaras, y que el dicho Abadia llamo al dicho Vidau y 
le dijo aparte, cata que le des grande golpe en la cara, o, 
en el cuello, que de otra manera no lo mataras porque 
lleva cerbillera y Jaco de malla, y despues que el dicho 
la badia se lo mostro y certifico era el Inquisidor el que 
estava arrodillado, le dio Vidau una cuchillada de rebes 
que le derrivo las varillas, y le corto la bena organical de la 
cerviz, y de este golpe murio, y por esto fue Vidau arrastrado 


a 


DOCUMENTS 597 


por la ciudad y vuelto a la plaza de la seo le aogaron y 
cortaron las manos, y esto se hizo por no darle tanta pena 
como al otro, porque dijo toda la verdad, y despues de 
muerto lo arrastraron asta el mercado y le hizieron alli 
quartos que los pusieron por los caminos y las manos en la 
puerta de la diputacion. 

Auto 11. A 28 de Julio, Biernes en la plaza de la seo, predico el Maestro 

1486. Crespo, fueron condenados al fuego 

1, Gaspar de Santa Cruz porque siendo cristiano comia y 
ayunava y hazia ceremonias como Judio, y porque el y 
Joan de Perosanchez offrecieron a Juan de labadia 500 
florines si matava al santo Inquisidor y que ellos le favore- 
cerian, y como se allo en su muerte y en las Juntas donde 
le fraguaron, que fueron la primera en el temple, la 2 en 
Santa Engracia, la 3* en el portillo, y por averse huydo a 
Tolosa de francia, donde murio, le quemaron en estatua, 
y a Geronimo de Santa Cruz su hijo que lo acompafio a 
Tolosa le dieron por penitencia que llevasse alla el processo 
o sentencia de su Padre y que hiziesse desenterrar los 
huesos y los quemasse y tragesse relacion dello de los In- 
quisidores de Tolosa, y assi lo executo. 

2. Martin de Santangel, porque siendo cristiano hazia cere- 
monias de Judios, complice en la dicha muerte del santo 
Inquisidor, aver contribuydo en el dinero recogido para 
ella, traer en sus horas quatro oraciones en hebreo y 
aquellos rezava, quemaronle en estatua. 

3. Violante salvador, muger de Gaspar de Santa Cruz, por 
ceremonias Judaycas, y no guardar el domingo. Por lo 
qual dezian sus criados que mas parecia su casa de Judios 
que de cristianos, y antes de yr a missa comia, y ponia 
tozino en la olla de los mozos y no en la suya porque 
geuardava la ley de Moysen, quemaronla en estatua. 

4. Garcia lopez, mercader, que siendo cristiano hizo ceremonias 
Judaycas y dava limosna a la cedaza, y tenia horas y Biblia 
en Hebreo, y nunca se confesso ni comulgo, y no creya que 
en la ostia consagrada estava dios, y tenia una mandragula 
en su cama y cada dia ponia en ella cinco sueldos y se yva 
a missa y quando querian alzar la ostia se salia de la 
yglesia, y entrava en su camara a ver la mandragula y 
allava diez sueldos en ella, y luego la adorava en el culo 
cada dia, quemaronle en estatua. 

5. Pedro de Exea mercader, siendo cristiano hizo ceremonias 
Judaycas, comio Amin y Arruqueques y carne en dias pro- 
hibidos, yva a las cabafias de judios y dava limosna por 
la ley de Moysen, y avia dado dineros a su muger para la 


598 


OO bo 


. Gracia Esplugas | 
. Leonor salillas muger de 


APPENDIX 


bolsa contra la Inquisicion para efectuar la muerte del 
santo Inquisidor, de que tuvo mucho placer. quemaronle. 


. Violante Ruys muger de N. de Santa Maria siendo cristiana 


hizo ceremonias de Judios, comia carne en dias prohibitos, 
nunca se santiguava ni arrodillava al alzar la ostia. 
quemaronla. 

A 6 de Agosto, domingo, predico el Maestro Garcia y salieron 
penitenciados por hereges 


. Joan de Santa Clara, por ceremonias y ayunos de Judios, 


volver los ojos por no ver alzar en missa, y quando con- 
tratava con cristiano de naturaleza lo procurava engafar, 
y se alegrava y dezia a otro confesso, Calle que estos 
cristianos de natura decaen poco a poco les daremos su ajo. 
Inviava a sus hijos 4 la Juderia para que les diessen la 
bendicion, y tenia una mandragula y la adorava en el culo, 
y dava limosna a la cedaza. fue penitenciado. 


. Diego de yta. } 
. Clara Belenguer muger de 


Por ceremonias Judayeas y 
otros graves errores en la 
fe, y no creer en muchos 
misterios della. 


Joan frances. 


Pedro Santa Clara. 
Penitenciados. 
A 24 de setiembre domingo en la seo, predico el Maestro 
Martin Garcia, y salieron por hereges con corozas los siguien- 
tes. 


. Beatriz lobera por ceremonias Judaycas y dezir que los 


eristlanos eran idolatras. 


. Violante Velviure, muger de M*™ Gonzalo de Santa Maria, 


ceremonias Judaycas. 


. Isavel Cruyllas, muger de Pedro de Almazan, ceremonias 


Judaycas, y porque hizo enbendar a un hermano suyo 
difunto a lo Judayco, y a un hijo enfermo lo hizo passar 
tres vezes por bajo de la horca tapiada en fe de que sanaria, 
y dezir que los cristianos de natura eran cristianos de mala 
ventura, y aver comido huevos crudos el dia de la muerte 
de su hermano, ceremonia de Judios. 


. La muger de Redo, hazia parar una mesa con mantiles en la 


bodega, diziendo que vendria a comer en ella el diablo y 
que le daria muchos bienes de fortuna, y mandava a la 
criada que quando cubriesse la mesa no dizesse Jesus 
aunque viesse algo, y que la mataria si lo nombrava, y 
por ceremonias Judaycas. 


. Antona Rodriguez, por dichas ceremonias, y degollar las 


aves al modo Judayco, y echar sobre la sangre polbo, y 
hazer que le bendijesse un Judio los bestidos. 


co ON 


10. 


te 


DOCUMENTS 599 


. La muger del bermejo, no sabia el credo sino asta Patrem 


omnipotentem, y ceremonias Judaycas. 


. Joan de Pueyo, trasmudador por casado dos vezes. 
. Francisco del Royo, ceremonias Judaycas. 
. Miguel de Almazan, por no aver notificado que estava cir- 


cuncidado estuvo con cirio al pie del altar. pareciasele la 
faba de la parte alta (?). 

Maria de llano testifico que vivian como Judios luys y Joan 
de Joan Sanchez y su muger, y el luys sanchez tuvo noticia 
dello y offrecio a dicha Maria muchas vezes que si yva y 
dezia a los Inquisidores que lo que avia depuesto contra 
ellos era con malicia y le desdezia la casaria y le daria 
para un manto, y de lo mismo le ablo un dia m™ Alonso - 
Sanchez en el carmen, y con esto la hizieron desdezir. Pero 
despues volvio a confessar la verdad, confirmando lo que 
avia testificado contra ellos primero. Por lo qual estuvo 
en la grada del tablado con un cirio. 


. A 21 de Octubre savado en la plaza de la seo, predico el 


Maestro Martinez, fueron relajados al fuego los siguientes. 


. Bernad de Robas mercader, padre de Francisco de Robas, 


passo a las ceremonias de judios, y los Viernes Santos se 
ponia un capirote de Judio, y uno de estos Viernes el y 
otros confessos comieron gallinas y capones en cierta casa, 
y dezia, Pues estos cristianos de mala ventura hazen oy 
el llanto, hagamos nosotros el canto. quemaronle. 


. Galceran Belenguer velero, se passo a las ceremonias Juday- 


cas, travajava los domingos, y decia que la ley de Moysen 
era mejor que la de Jesu cristo, y un dia passando unos 
frayles de la Compania de Santa Maria de Jesus, dijo como 
se hallaran burlados estos, pues no ay otro mundo sino este. 
quemaronle. 

Gabriel de Aojales mercader, dezia ser mejor la ley de Moy- 
sen que la de los cristianos, y un dia leyendo en presencia de 
otra persona la Biblia dijo, mirad si es mejor creer a todos 
estos profetas que no a lo que dizen aquellos doze borrachos, 
entendendolo por los doze Apostoles de Cristo n. s. passo a 
las ceremonias Judaycas y le quemaron. 


. Guillen de Bruysan mercader, hazia las mismas, y dezia que 


qualquier que viniesse contra la ley de Moysen haria mal 
fin, y que ella era mejor que la de los cristianos. quema- 
ronle. 


. Gonzalo de Yta, por dichas ceremonias y comio en la Juderia 


y muchos vezes con su Padre que era Judio. quemaronle. 


. Rodrigo de Gris carnicero, Padre de mossen Gris, fue sacado 


primero en otro auto por herege, y aviendole peniten- 


600 


APPENDIX 


ciado en darle por carcel una casa cave san felipe, y con 
penas de Relapso se fue de la carcel y bolvio a cometer los 
mismos crimines, y en este auto le quemaron en estatua. 


. Maria Labadia muger de Martin Salvador panicero comia 


carne viernes y savados, y los viernes por la tarde ponia 
manteles limpios en la mesa, y dos lamparas encendidas 
colgadas en una querda a cada punta de la mesa, y los otros 
dias comia en mesa diferente, y dezia que no lo queria hazer 
delante de su yerno porque era cristiano de mala ventura, 
y que la ley de Moysen era mejor que la nuestra y que se 
avia allado y venido en la muerte del Inquisidor M® Epila, 
y por ceremonias Judaycas. La quemaron. 


. A 29 de Noviembre domingo, en la plaza de la seo, predico 


el M® Martinez, y fueron condenados al fuego los siguientes. 


. Pedro de Moros, por ceremonias de Judios y dezir que la 


ley de Moysen era la mejor de todas, y que el Rey que 
hazia la guerra a los Moros venia contra el mandamiento 
de dios. 


. Alvaro de Sevilla carnicero, el dia que ayunava el ayuno de 


Quipur abrazava a otro confesso por ceremonia de Judios 
y dezia que la ley de Moysen era mejor que la de Cristo. 


. Cristoval de Gelba comia con los moros de sus manjares y 


conversava con ellos y dezia que era Moro y que le llama- 
van Alfans, y hazia oracion en la Mesquita como moro, y 
ceremonias Judaycas. 


. Joan de Vitoria por las mismas y por pedir por las Juderias 


para la cedaza, diziendo que era Judio. 


. Catalina Sanchez, Madre de Mossen Pedro Bagues por dichas 


ceremonias y hazer todas las cosas de los Judios y observar 
sus ritos. 


. Francisca Daniel muger de Jayme Daniel por dichas cere- 


monias y enbiar limosna para bendezir las fazes de sus hijos 
al Ravi de la Juderia y les hazia llevar antorchas delante 
de la Tora. 


. Blanquina Fernandez, muger de Pedro Fernandez corredor, 


por lo mismo que Francisca Daniel. 


. Blanca de Adam alias leonor de Montesa, por lo mismo. 
. Maria Rodriguez passo a las ceremonias Judaycas, fue muger 


de Joan Rotoner tinturero, nunca supo el credo, hazia 
bendezir sus hijos al Ravi, no creya que en la ostia consa- 
grada estuviesse dios, y quando massava hechava peda- 
cillos de massa en el fuego, ceremonia Judayca. 


10, 11. Pedro y Luys de Almazan, hijos de Manuel de Almazan 


porque estavan circuncidados los tenian por sospechosos en 
la fe, y assi les dieron por penitencia que mientras se dezia 


, =o 


DOCUMENTS 601 


en la Yglesia el officio assistiessen con sendas belas, y los 
desterraron de Garagoga por diez afios. 


Auto 16. Micer Francisco de Santa Fe complice en la muerte del 
En el por- 
tillo saca- 
ron sola- 


mente 
este reo. 


1486. 


a 


Santo M® Epila estando preso en la Inquisicion viernes a 
15 de Deziembre de este afio 1486, entre ocho y nueve 
de la mafiana se arrojo desde las almenas de la torre en 
donde estava su carcel, en camisa, y del golpe quedo 
muerto, y este dia lo llevaron junto al portillo, y alli le 
mandaron leer los Inquisidores su processo en donde se 
dijo como avia passado a las ceremonias Judaycas, y que 
en su casa ensehava a un Judio las oraciones dellas, y 
dezia que la ley de Moysen era mejor que la de cristo, 
y que qualquier buen Judio se podra salvar, era retajado, y 
leyda su sentencia le quemaron y pusieron los guesos en 
su camisa y en una cajuela lo hecharon por ebro abajo. 
Este auto lo quento por el 16, por averse hecho con toda 
esta solennidad. 


Auto 17. A 17 de Deziembre domingo en la seo predico el M° Martin 


1486. 


fd 


Garcia y fueron condenados por hereges los que se siguien. 


. Fernan lopez de Teruel porque siendo cristiano hazia ayunos 


y ceremonias de Judios, y dezia que la ley de Moysen era 
mejor que la de los cristianos, y quando se confessava 
nunca dezia verdad. 


. Bernad Sabadias por lo mismo y teniendo por mejor la ley 


de Moysen dezia que la de los cristianos toda era trancos 
barrancos (?). 


. Bartolome Sanchez por ayunos y manjares Judaycos, yr a 


la sinagoga con los Judios, y aver dicho a uno dellos, 
Cornelio bien te estas en la ley de Moysen que mejor es que 
la de los cristianos. 


. Gilabert de Almazan que siendo cristiano passo a los man- 


jares y ceremonias Judaycas, dezir que tan bien se podra 
salvar el buen Judio como el cristiano y que no havia 
Infierno, y que el Parayso era tener dinero, y que un dia 
que jurava por la ostia consagrada, sabiendo uno de los 
que le oyeron que mentia le dijo que porque jurava men- 
tiendo, y le respondio que todo el juramento era burla, y 
quando alzavan en lamissa se passeava sin arrodillarse 
jamas. 


. Beatriz Daniel, muger de caseda el calcetero, porque despues 


de vuelta cristiana siguio los ritos Judaycos. 


. Isavel Matheo, muger de Leonart Sanchez por lo mismo, y 


aver ydo a la fiesta de la circuncision de un Judio. 


. Isavel Belloc, muger de Leonart de Sabrelas, por cere- 


monias, manjares y ayunos Judaycos. 


602 APPENDIX 


8. Salio tambien un cristiano por blasfemo de dios y de nuestra 
sefiora, atravesada la lengua por una cafia el rato que duro 
el officio. 

9. Un Judio por blasfemo, con freno en la boca, y espuerta de 
paja y coroza. estuvo assi quando duro el officio 

Auto 18. A 21 de henero Jueves en la plaza del Portillo, predico el 
1487. M° Martinez, y salieron condenados al fuego 

1. Joan de la badia difunto, sobre una cavalgadura, que el dia 
antes se desespero en la carcel comiendose una lampara de 
vidro a pedacitos, fue este malvado quien anduvo mas de 
aho y medio por matar al Santo Inq’ M® Epila en com- 
pafiia de Esperandeu, Mateo Ram, Vidau frances y otros 
Judios inducidores que yvan en su compafiia con mascaras. 
este Juan de labadia fue quien dijo a Vidau frances dale 
que este es. Arrastraronle difunto, y le cortaron las manos, 
y lo hizieron quartos, que los pusieron por los caminos. 

2. Pedro de Almazan mercader que despues de cristiano hizo 
ceremonias de Judios, inducidor y complice de dicha 
muerte, fue quemado in estatua. 

3. Anton Perez, que vuelto cristiano hizo ceremonias Judayeas, 
y tratandose un dia en su presencia del S® Inq? dizo que 
seria mejor matalle, y que se haria con 200 florines. fue 
quemado en estatua. 

4, Joan Belenguer corredor, que despues de convertido a la fe 
volvio a los ritos de Judios y un Jueves santo lo hizieron 
azotador de Jesu cristo, y el se alababa dello, diziendo yo 
os juro a dios que yo me bengare y me tirare el deseo y le 
fustigare de azotes, yva con su muger a las cabafias de los 
Judios y dezia Yo Judio soy, y tengo placer de ser Judio. 
quemaronle en estatua. 

5. Pedro de Vera notario, que vuelto cristiano volvio a los 
ritos y manjares Judaycos, ayunava el quipur, y era 
recogedor de la moneda y bolsa de los confessos, y encendia 
las lamparas de la sinagoga. quemaronle in estatua. 

Auto 19. A 15 de Febrero domingo, en la seo, Predico fray Pedro 
1487. _ ferriz Prior de S. Augustin, salieron en el auto los siguientes. 

1. Anton de ojos negros Capatero, por ceremonias y ayunos 
de Judio y dezir que nuestra santa ley era burla y que no 
la creya. 

2. Ramon Cruyllas, que siendo cristiano hazia ritos de Judio. 

3. Jayme de Robas mercader, que vuelto cristiano passo a las 
ceremonias Judaycas y por consejo de Pedro de Urrea y 
de Alvaro de Segovia dava limosna a los Judios y dezia 
que el misterio de los santos corporales de daroca era cosa 
de burla y bellaqueria, y que no lo creya nada. 


6. 


DOCUMENTS 603 


. Joana de la Tiria, muger de diego de la Tiria sastre, vuelta 


cristiana uso de todas las ceremonias de Judios, no savia 
del credo sino asta creatorem celi et terrae, no creya que en 
la ostia consagrada estuviesse el cuerpo de Cristo dios y 
hombre, dezia que los Judios no le avian muerto y avia 
ayunado el quipur mas dg 30 afios. 


. M® Joan de lo poret bainero por casado dos vezes. 
. Leonor Calvo segunda muger de loporet, en vida de su 


marido. 
A 15 de Marzo en la plaza de la seo Jueves. Predico el 
Maestro Miguel y fueron condenados al fuego 


. Joan Rodriguez mercader, porque vuelto cristiano volvio a 


las ceremonias y ritos de Judio, y dezia cristianos de natura 
cristianos de mala ventura, y quando alguno dezia Jesus 
respondia callad que es nombre de Penzat. 


. Pedro fernandez corredor despues de cristiano volvio a las 


ceremonias de Judio, y estando muy enfermo le dezia una 
hermana suya, hermano encomendaos al dios de Abraham, 
y el no le respondia. 


. Joan ortigas mayor, corredor, que vuelto cristiano Judayzo 


y comia carne en la quaresma, y dezia aquel refran de 
cristianos de natura &c., y porque sermonava en casa de 
un Judio la ley de Moysen donde azotavan la imagen de 
un crucefisso, y el era uno de los que azotavan, y despues 
lo hecharon en el fuego para que se quemasse. quemaronle 
en estatua a este impio. 


. Joan Ram despues de hecho cristiano volvio a los ritos de 


Judio y llebaba una nomina escrita en hebreo, fue yerno 
de Joan de Perosanchez y factor y assessino del S® Inq 
y daba dinero para hazerla.—quemaronle en estatua. 


. M® Alonso Sanchez, por ceremonias y comidas de Judios, y 


porque bestido con roquete como Rabi leya 4 otros malos 
cristianos la ley de Moysen, y azotaban despues un cruci- 
fisso y lo arrojavan en el fuego. Ybase a la sinagoga a rezar 
con su capirote y tabardo de Judio y trabajo con todas 
sus fuerzas porque matassen al S® Inq, y por ello 
prometio buena paga y lo trato con algunos diziendoles 
que sino querian matar al Inq® M° Epila almenos matassen 
a M’ Martin de la Raga qui era Asessor de la enquesta. 
Arrastraron su estatua y despues la quemaron. 

Garcia de Moros, notario, que vuelto cristiano volvio tan 
bien a las ceremonias Judaycas, y aver dicho dos dias antes 
que matassen al S® Inq a un amigo suyo a quien el 
solicitava mucho para dicha muerte, haveys visto que caso 
ha sido matar a m? Pertusa, pues antes de muchos domingos 


604 


10. 


12 


APPENDIX 


vereys otro caso mayor, y que despues de muerto el S® 
Ing” dijo a un otro amigo, que os pareze de esta muerte, 
quan bien hecha ha sido, y respondiendole el amigo que no 
dizesse tal, y reprehendendole dello, le bolbio a dezir, dejaos 
estar desso que todo se passara. Arrastraron y quemaron 
su estatua. 


. Leonor Perez, muger de Garci 


lopez. Todas tres por ceremo- 
. Angelina Sanchez, muger de nias ayunos y comeres 

Guillen Buysan. Judaycos fueron que- 
. Gostanza de Segovia, muger de madas en estatua. 


luys de la cabra, argentero. 

Joan Frances, despues de cristiano hizo ceremonias de 
Judios y dezia el salmo de la maldicion porque dios matasse 
al Ing® al Rey y ala Reyna, dezia que no avia otro parayso 
sino el dinero y que mas queria yr al Infierno con los ricos 
que al parayso, y quando yva a missa dezia por escarnio 
que yva a masar, fue sospechoso en la muerte del S® Inq”. 
quemaronle. 

(11?). Mateo Ram, despues de hecho cristiano volvio a 
Judayzar y travajo mucho en procurar se effectuasse la 
muerte del S® Ing y aunque esperandeu le hirio con 
una estocada en el brazo y Vidau con la cuchillada del 
cuello, este Mateo le dio una estocada que le passo el 
cuerpo. Arrastraronle y le cortaron las manos y las 
clabaron en la puerta de la diputacion, y despues le quema- 
ron. 


. El primero de Abril, domingo en el hospital, predico el M° 


Martin Garcia, y pusieron en un cadaalso a la puerta de 
la yglesia a un 


. Clerigo porque se avia fingido Inquisidor con una probision 


falsa en un lugar de Mossen Belenguer de Bardaxi, y avia 
hecho una prision a esse pueblo. 


. A 6 de Mayo, domingo, en la seo predico el M® Martin 


Garcia y estuvieron con cirios al pie del altar en todo el 
officio los siguientes. 


. Mossen Guillen Sanchez, 

. Joan de fatas, notario, 

. Pedro Augustin, 

. Bernardo Bernardi, florentin 


Pedro Celdrion. Todos cinco porque fueron defensores de 


. Joan de Pero Sanchez, heretico, sacrilego, Matador del S® 


Inq* y invocador de Assessines y matadores. 
estando el dicho Joan de Perosanchez presso en la ciudad 
de Tolosa de Francia a instancia de un estudiante que se 


Auto 23 
1487. 


co SJ SD orb © bb 


10. 


1H 


DOCUMENTS | 605 


llamava Antonio Augustin, que despues fue — de Aragon, 
y de otros dos estudiantes que lo escrivieron luego con sus 
criados avisandolo a los Inq® de Garagocga como le avian 
hecho prender. Vinieron los criados con las cartas a la casa 
de los dichos Joan de fatas y Pedro Augustin su hermano, 
donde los detuvieron abriendo las cartas y las mostraron 
al dicho Mossen Guillen Sanchez hermano del dicho Joan 
de Perosanchez, y luego escrivieron todos los cinco a los 
estudiantes de Tolosa y a otros amigos para que alli renun- 
ciassen el reclamo de la prision y le hiziessen soltar, y assi 
se hizo, y despues de hecha esta diligencia con ellos dieron 
las cartas a los Inq’ y ellos despacharon a Tolosa para 
que lo tuviessen a buen recado, pero ya entonces estava libre 
de la carcel Joan de Perosanchez. Por este delicto los 
hizieron abjurar a los cincos y que si tornavan a hazer tal o 
semejante delicto les darian la pena del derecho, y los 
condenaron a todos cinco en mil florines de oro y en las 
expensas hechas y por hazer, y los pribaron de sus officios 
quedando en arbitrio de los Inq™ el priballos de officio y 
beneficio. | 

A 20 de Mayo, domingo en la seo, Predico el M® Forcat, y 
huvo en el cadalso 6 mugeres y un hombre, y al pie del 
altar quatro hombres. 


. Leonor Castillo muger de Alvaro de Sevilla, Judayzante. 

. Beatriz Coscolluela muger de Pedro Pedraza, Judayzante. 
. Joana Trigo, muger de Joan de Altabas, Judayzante. 

. Isavel de Rueda, madre de Pedro Salvador, lo mismo. 

. Violante Mongua, muger de Jayme Santa Clara, lo mismo. 
. Maria del Rio, muger de Gonzalo Ruyz, Judayzante y comer 


carne en quaresma. 


. Joan de Altabas, pintor, por ceremonias de Judios. 
. Anton de Jassa despues de cristiano por Judayzante comer 


arrecuques y Amin y carne en quaresma, y sospechoso de 
la muerte del S° Ing®. 


. Garcia de Moros el Joben estuvo con un cirio por sospechoso 


de la dicha muerte, y por yr a jugar a las canafiuelas de 
los Judios. 

Pedro Pinet capellan de Alcafiiz que defendia cinco opiniones 
hereticas contra la s™ trinidad. 

Joan Traper por fautor y defensor de hereges, y aver querido 
matar a Anton Baptista por un testimonio signado que no 
se puede aver, y dezir yo tanto tengo de una missa como 
un asno de una albarda, y que queria hazer un hijo en 
savado para que fuesse Ravi y por sospechoso en la 
muerte del S*° Ing”. 


606 


Auto’ 24. 


1487. 


if 


APPENDIX 


A 18 de Agosto savado en la plaza de la seo, Predico el M° 
Martin Garcia, fueron condenados a muerte y al fuego, 
Diego de Gotor notario y procurador, que despues de conver- 
tido a la fe volvio a las ceremonias de Judio, y dijo que 
seria bien matar al S'° Ing porque no osasse venir otro, y 
que assi se desharia la enquesta. quemaronle en estatua. 


. Pedro de Almazan menor, que convertido a la fe volvio a 


las ceremonias y manjares Judaycos, y dijo que seria bien 
matar al S® Ing y dio dinero en la bolsa comun para 
dicha muerte, y averse allado con otros en azotar un cru- 
cifissaeqnembronle en estatua. 


. Pedro Salvador, hijo de martin salvador, nieto de. J oan de la 


badia porque cupo en la muerte del gio Inq, y'‘aver dado 
de pufialadas a la muger de Pedro el carnicero porque avia 
sido testigo en la enquesta contra su madre. le quemaron 
en estatua. 


. N. muger de Pedro Navarro, botiguero que hecha cristiana 


volvio a los ritos, ayunos y ceremonias de Judios, y que al 
tiempo de alzar el SS™° - volvia los ojos por no verlo. 
—quemaronla. 


. La madre de Anton Romeo, que convertida a la fe volvio a 


los ritos de Judios. 


. Leonor de Bello, madre de. Abadia, por Judayzante, que- 


mada en estatua. 


. Valentina Tamarit, muger de luys de Joansanchez, lo mismo. 
. Mossen luys de Santangel, a quien el Rey don Jayme [Juan] 


armo caballero en la guerra de Catalufia, despues de con- 
vertido a la fe volvio a las ceremonias de Judio, y hazia 
oracion en hebreo, y tenia la Tora en un altar en la torre 
de la huerta, y teniendo enfermo a un hijo dijo que dios 
no le podra sanar, y a un capellan que le dezia unas missas, 
Mas creo y mas fe doy a un p". x". que dize mi hija casera 
suya que a quanto vos dezis. yauna ymagen de un cruci- 
fisso la azotava, y escupia en la cara, y le hazia muchos 
vituperios, y lo tenia embuelto en un trapello bien ligado 
con unas cabezadas de mula. y se avian ajuntado en su 
casa, que era la que agora es de Alonso Celdron Bayle, 
para tratar la muerte del 8 Inq™ los siguientes, Joan de 
Perosanchez, Gaspar Santa Cruz, Garcia de Moros, Mateo 
Ram, Micer Alonso Sanchez, Micer Montesa y otros. Y 
otra vez se juntaron en casa de dicho Montesa, otra en el 
Portillo, otra en Santa Engracia, otra en el Temple, y el 
dijo a los otros que matassen al Inq®* y a M’ Martin de 
la Raga, y a M* Montes frances a todos tres y a alguno 
dellos, y como fue alli concertado tomo cargo dello el dicho 


,. 


DOCUMENTS 607 


Mossen luys Santangel porque era hombre de espada, y 
Joan de Perosanchez que era hombre dineroso, y ambos 
dieron la orden y recado para que se hiziesse la muerte. 
Micer Algar Reg le dio por sentencia que le fuesse cortada 
la cabeza en el mercado, y que le pusiesse en un palo, y que 
el cuerpo fuesse quemado fuera de la puerta quemada, y 
assi se executo. 
Auto 25. A 20 de Agosto lunes en la plaza de la seo, predico el M° 
1487. Martinez, fueron condenados a muerte tres hombres y una 
estatua. 

1. M Jayme Montesa Jurista, del qual dijo su processo que 
despues de convertido a la fe hazia ceremonias de Judio, 
y que un Viernes santo estando en Calatayud hizieron unas 
desponsalias de un Judio con una Judia y dijo M™ Montesa 
a un escudero suyo que baylasse en ellas, y el le respondio 
que no baylaria en tal dia porque mas era dia de plorar, 
porque estando los cristianos en la yglesia en tales dias no 
era hora de reyr, y dijole Montesa que si facian el planto, 
que dios les diesse el crebanto, y esto otorgo muy larga- 
mente por escritura de su mano, y como se havia allado en 
el trato de la muerte del S® Ing” M® Epila, y como para 
ello se havian ajuntado en el temple dos meses antes que 
la executassen el y Mosen luys de santangel, Joan de 
Perosanchez, Gaspar de Santa Cruz, Garcia de Moros, M* 
Alonso Sanchez, Martin de Santangel y otros que alli se 
hallaron, y que dieron poder a Joan Sanchez porque era 
dineroso, y a Mossen luys porque era de Espada, y a otros 
que no se nombran, que en ello diessen orden y recado para 
hazer esta muerte y la de M Martin de la Raga y de M* 
Pedro Montes frances, y que los sobredichos se ajuntaron 
otra vez en el portillo y dijeron como que se tardava 
mucho, y que no se hazia nada, y respondieron los que lo 
tenian a su cargo como ya se travajava en ella y que tenian 
personas que la pondrian en execucion, y que havian estado 
dos noches en la seo en Maytines y no le havian podido allar 
y que no cuydassen dello que muy presto pondrian en 
effecto dicha muerte, y que al cavo de pocos dias se vol- 
vieron a juntar en S™ Engracia y les dijeron otra vez a 
los solicitadores de este caso que como se tardava tanto y 
respondieron que presto darian recado en dicha muerte, 
la qual perpetraron de alli a pocos dias. Mas dezian en 
su processo que habia el conbidado o allado a un hombre 
para si queria matar al Inq’ y que el hombre le respondio 
que no, y despues que fue muerto el Inq®" se topo con el 
dicho hombre y le dijo, Bueno fuera ganar 150 florines 


608 
2 
3 
4 
Auto 26 
1487. 
1 
2 
3 
4, 
sf 
6 
ff 
8 
9 
Auto 27 
1488. 
1 


APPENDIX 


que ya es fecho aquello, a lo qual le respondio el hombre, 
Buen provecho os haga, que yo no me curo dello, Antes 
creo que todo este mal vendra sobre vosotros, a lo qual le 
respondio M" Montesa lo fecho fecho es, que con el dinero lo 
faremos todo bueno con el Rey y con la Reyna, y todos los 
de la corte son nuestros, y los grandes de este reyno tan 
bien, que todo se passara. Y un dia despues del caso se 
hallaron dichos M’ Montesa y Gaspar de Santa Cruz y que 
le dijo 600 florines questa la muerte del Inq®. fuele dada 
sentencia por M™ Algar Reg® que le cortasen la cabeza en 
el mercado y la pusiessen en un palo, y le quemassen el 
cuerpo fuera de la puerta quemada. 


. Leonor Montesa, hija de dicho M* Jayme Montesa, muger 


de Joan de Santa fe de Tarazona, siendo Bautizada vivia 
como Judia y seguia sus ritos, y avia 50 afios que ayunava 
el quipur y dava limosna a la cedaza y aceyte a las lam- 
paras de la sinagoga. quemaronla. 


. Violante de leon, Madre de Galceran de leon procurador por 


lo mismo que a la dicha leonor, y porque no creya que en 
la ostia consagrada estuviesse dios. quemaronla. 


. Cristoval de Gelva, despues de convertido a la fe, Judayzo y 


passo a la ley de Mahoma, dieronle por carcel perpetua el 
hospital de nuestra S*. de Gracia, como a Relapso, y que- 
branto la carzel, y le quemaron en estatua. 


. A 8 de Diz® domingo en la seo, predico el Maestro Martinez, 


fueron sacados al cadaalso por hereges 


. Dofia Catalina de Cuenca que hecha cristiana volvio a las 


ceremonias de la ley de Moysen y tuvo algunos errores. 


. Esperanza Quilloc. 
. Clara Cerbellon, muger de Ginones verguero 


Maria Rodriguez muger de Pedro Angel chap.nero 
Leonor Maza, muger de Jayme Garcia mercader 


. Isavel de Genua muger de Bar® de Soria potrero, 
. Brianda de Gauna hija de Mossen Alvaro de Gauna, 
. Gracia de Anguas Vivas, muger de Joan Ruyz calcetero y 


de Guillen Ruyz belero. 


. Isavel de leon, muger de Joan de leon calcetero, fue a los 


desposorios de Jaque Judio hermano de su marido. 
Todos nueve por Judayzantes, ayunos y comeres de 
Judios. 


. A 10 de Febrero Domingo, en la seo, Predico el Maestro 


Alfonso forea, canonigo de nuestra Sefiora y salieron peni- 
tenciados en el 


. Mossen Pedro Santangel Prior de daroca, dezia su _ pro- 


cesso que rogo y pago a Joan Gascon casero de la Torre de 


10. 


Auto 28 
1488. 


DOCUMENTS 609: 


Mossen Luys porque digesse a los Inq®* que Mossen Luys. 
era buen cristiano y que el lo havia visto disciplinarse 
delante de un crucifisso, y no era verdad. estas y otras cosas. 
hizo por escapar a su hermano y por esse estuvo con un 
cirio en la mano delante del altar mayor, y no le privaron 
de nada. 


. Joan Gascon porque testiguo en favor de Mossen Luys por: 


rogarias del dicho Prior, dijo que havia dicho verdad en. 
lo que avia testificado, le dieron la misma penitencia. 


. Jayme diez de Almendarez sefior de Cadreyta navarro porque. 


tuvo en su casa y favorecio a Martin de Santangel a Garcia. 
de Moros y a Gaspar de Santa Cruz y a su muger, y recivio 
dellos sesenta florines que le dieron de oro. fue peniten-- 
ciado como los precedentes. 


. Manuel de Tudela pontero, por aver ydo a Villanueva. 


muchas vezes a persuadir a una muger que se retratasse 
de lo que avia testificado contra Violante Ruiz Viuda de 
N. de Santa Maria, dieronle la misma penitencia. 


. Elvira de Uneastillo por aver depuesto por rogarias del. 


Prior de daroca en favor de su hermano el dicho Mossen. 
luys de Santangel, y confesso que no era verdad lo que: 
avia dicho contra el, la misma penitencia. 


. Joan Julian corredor por aver solicitado por orden de Jayme- 


trafer el qual le dio 20 florines de oro y casa franca de 
loguero a una muger para que se desdigesse. dieronle la. 
misma penitencia. 


. Nicolao suseda Borgofion por casado doz vezes estuvo con: 


coroza y fue condenado a carcel perpetua. 


. Violante Ram, muger de N.*Altabas por aver ayunado el: 


quipur y ensenadolo a los muchachos que tenia, salio con 
coroza y carcel perpetua. 


. Sancho de Pefia panicero por casado dos vezes, coroza y 


carcel perpetua. 

Joan de Zamora porque estando en la ciudad de Medina 
ablando con unos hombres de la ostia consagrada que 
dichas aquellas palabras estava dios alli, respondio el 
andad alla que es burla que dios no baja a ella, que: 
yo se como se hazen aquellas ostias con unos hierros,. 
que todo es burla que alli no esta dios. diosele carcel 
perpetua. 

A 15 de Febrero Biernes sacaron muerto de la Aljaferia a 
1. Pedro Navarro chapinero que estava preso por herege- 
y murio de enfermedad, sacaronle a quemar, y estava cir-- 
cuncidado, y circuncidava sus hijos, y vivia como Judio y~ 
ayunava el quipur. 

39 


610 


APPENDIX 


Auto 29. A 2 de Marzo, domingo en la seo, Predico el Maestro Martin 
1488. 


Auto 
Auto 
Auto 
Auto 
Auto 
Auto 
Auto 
Auto 
Auto 
Auto 
Auto 


ts 


. Justina Macipe 

. Pedro de Segovia 

. Joan de Prades, tegedor 

. Pedro fernandez, panicero 

. Pasqual de Reglas, labrador 


. Pedro Gomez, Alcayde 
. Guillen de fatas 

. Martin de Aguas 

. Pedro Manarriz 

. Joan Bazquez 

. Joan de Aguas 

. Joan de Magallon 

. Joan de Carriazo 


Garcia y salieron a el las siguientes. 

Aldonza Ribas Altas que por estar enferma la llevaron en un 
escafio delante del altar mayor con coroza y manteta por 
Judayzante, esta era Madre de Maestre Ribas altas medico 
del Rey catolico don fernando el de la poma de oro que fue 
quemado vivo por traer en la poma un pergaminillo y en 
el pintado a cristo n. s" crucificado y sobre el retratado el 
medico asentado de forma que parecia le besava la santa 
Imagen en el culo. dizen que viendo este pergamino el 
Principe don Joan que lo mostro al Rey catolico su padre 
y que de ay tuvo origen el mandar expeler los Judios de 
espana sino se convertian. 


. Maria de Esplugas, hija de Gilaberte de Esplugas porque 


siendo cristiana usso de ceremonias y manjares de Judios, 
y por consilio de su madre ayunava el quipur, y despues 
h isitado | lesi Juebes S® f la Juderi 
que huvo visitado las yglesias un Juebes ue a la Juderia 
& hacer colacion, y comio arecuques, no la privaron de 
bienes por averse ydo ella espontaneamente a delatar. 


Por comeres y ceremonias 
Judaycas. 


Por casados dos vezes. 


Ciudadanos de Tudela salieron de- 
lante del altar mayor por solici- 
tadores de Joan de Perosanchez 
y de su muger, Martin de Sant 
Angel, Gaspar de Santa Cruz y 
su. muger, Garcia de Moros, 
Mossen Pedro Mafias y de los 
dos Pedro de Almazan mayor y 

menor, todos hereges y factores 
ange) Laeheehsics de la muerte del S® Inq”. 


. March 21, 1488, Eleven penanced. 

. May 4, 1488, Three penanced. 

. Aug. 10, 1488, Five penanced. 

. August 17, 1488, One penanced. 

. September 7, 1488, One penanced. 

. January 25, 1489, Fourteen penanced. 

. May 2, 1489, Two penanced and three burnt. 
. May 10, 1489, Thirty-eight penanced. 

. May 2, 1490, Twenty-nine penanced. 

. May 9, 1490, Twenty-seven penanced. 

. November 28, 1490, Seventeen penanced. 


Auto 41. 
Auto 42. 
Auto 43. 
Auto 44. 
Auto 45. 


Auto 45 


Auto 46. 
Auto 47. 
Auto 48. 
Auto 49. 
Auto 50. 
Auto 51. 
mT OL: 
Auto 53. 
Auto 54. 
Auto 55. 
Auto 56. 
Auto 57. 
Auto 58. 
Auto 59. 
Auto 60. 
Auto 61. 
Auto 62. 
Auto 63. 
Auto 64. 
Auto 65. 


DOCUMENTS 611 


April 22, 1491, Eight penanced and one burnt. 
May 15, 1491. Twenty-four penanced. 

July 8, 1491, Ten burnt. 

July 17, 1491, Six penanced. 

March 28, 1492, Eleven penanced. 

(sic). September 8, 1492, Twenty-one penanced. 
September 28, 1492, Thirteen burnt. 
November 11, 1492, Twelve penanced. 

June 2, 1493, Nine penanced and thirteen burnt. 
December 22, 1493, Seventeen penanced. 

May 7, 1494, Six penanced. 

January 9, 1495, Six burnt. 

January 18, 1495, Seven penanced. 

June 30, 1495, Six burnt. 

July 2, 1495, Fourteen penanced. 

October 7, 1496, Twenty-two penanced. 
June 27, 1497, Ten penanced. 

March 12, 1498, Seven penanced. 

May 5, 1498, Three burnt. 

February 22, 1499, Eleven burnt. 

February (August?) 4, 1499, Seven penanced. 
September 13, 1499, Four burnt. 

September 15, 1499, Four penanced. 
January 18, 1500, Six penanced. 

May 31, 1501, Seventeen penanced. 

March 15, 1502, Eleven burnt, 


Resumen de los castigados en los Autos referidos. 


1484.. 7 Afio 1491. .49 Afio 1497. .10 
1485.. 3 1492. .58 1498. .10 
1486. .89 1493. .39 1499. .26 
1487. .52 1494.. 6 1500.. 6 
1488. .45 1495. .34 1501. .17 
1489. .57 1496. .22 1502. .11 
1490. .73 aaa 


602" 


' The total number is 614 ‘There is a mistake of 3 in the addition, and errors 
in several years. 


612 APPENDIX 


XT. 


Letrer or Caruos III Tro tHe Port, DECEMBER 26, 1774, ASKING 
HIM TO CONCEDE THE FACULTIES OF INQUISITOR-GENERAL 
TO FELIPE BERTRAN, BISHOP OF SALAMANCA. 


(Archivo General de Simancas, Secretaria de Gracia y Justicia, Legajo 
629, fol. 15). 
(See p. 304). 


Muy Santo Papre. Por muerte del muy Reverendo en Christo 
Arzobispo, Don Manuel Quintano Bonifaz, ha vacado el cargo de 
Inquisidor General de todos mis Reynos, y deseando que quien le 
huviere de succeder en este empleo sea el que mas convenga al servicio 
de Dios y de su Iglesia, conservacion y aumento de la fé catolica he 
nombrado al muy Reverendo in Christo Padre Don Bertran, Obispo 
de Salamanca por concurrir en su persona las calidades de virtud, 
sangre, autoridad y prendas que le hacen digno de ocuparle, y encargo 
& mi Ministro Plenipotentiario Conde de Floridablanca que en mi 
Real nombre suplique 4 Vuestra Santidad tenga por bien de mandar 
despachar 4 favor del referido Obispo de Salamanca Don Felipe Ber- 
tran el Breve que se acostumbra para exercer el expresado cargo, y 
pido 4 Vuestra Beatitud que dando entera fé y credito al Conde de 
Floridablanca en lo que 4 este intento representare en mi Real nombre 
se sirva Vuestra Santidad de acordar la gracia que solicito. Nuestro 
Sefior guarde la muy Santa persona de Vuestra Beatitud al bueno y 
prospero Regimiento de su universal Iglesia. De Palacio 4 veinte y 
seis de Diciembre di mil setecientos setenta y quarto. 

D. V. SANT? 


Muy humilde y devoto hijo Don Carlos, por la gracia de Dios Rey 
de las Espafias, de las Dos Sicilias, de Jerusalem etc. que sus santos 
pies y manos besa. Ex Rey. 

MANUEL DE Ropa. 


FORMULA OF PAPAL APPOINTMENT (Ibidem, fol. 1). 


Motu proprio et ex certa scientia ac matura deliberatione nostris, 
deque Apostolic potestatis plenitudine, te in predicti Emmanuelis 
Archiepiscopi locum tenore presentium Generalem Inquisitorem 
adversus hereticam et apostaticam a Fide Christiana pravitatem in 
Castellee et Legionis ceterisque Hispaniarum et ab eis dependentibus 
Regnis, Principatibus et dominiis eidem Carolo Regi mediate vel 
immediate subjectis . . . Apostolica auctoritate tenore praesen- 
tium ad nostrum et Sedis Apostolic beneplacitum, creamus, facimus, 
constituimus et deputamus. 


DOCUMENTS 613 


BGhis 
RESIGNATION OF INQUISITOR-GENERAL SOTOMAYOR. 


(Archivo de Simancas, Consejo de Inquisicion, Libro 176, fol. 1). 
(See p. 310). 


Letter to Philip [V.— 

SeNor. Remito 4 V. M. esas papeles en razon de la renunciacion 
que V. M. me tiene mandado hazer de el oficio de Inquisidor general. 
Si en algo no fuesen 4 satisfacion de V. M. siempre me hallo con la 
misma obediencia 4 quanto V. M. fuese servido de mandarme, cuya 
Real persona guarde nuestro Sehor como su Santa Iglesia lo a men- 
ester y como yo siempre se lo suplico. De Madrid en 21 de Junio, 1643. 

Besa los Reales pies de V. M. su mas humilde criado 

Fr. ANTONIO. 


A nuestro santisimo Padre Urbano 8, Sumo Pontifice de la Santa 
Iglesia Romana que Dios guarde.— 

Bz pe. Yo fray Antonio de Sotomayor, Arcobispo de Damasco, 
confesor de su Magestad Catholica del Rey mi sefior Phelipe 4°, de 
su consejo de estado, comisario general de la santa Cruzada, Inquisidor 
general en sus Reynos y dominios; Hallandome muy cargado de afios 
que son cerca de noventa, 6 por lo menos ochenta y ocho y consiguiente- 
mente casi incapaz de poder condignamente satisfacer 4 oficios de 
tantas obligaciones me hallo obligado, postrado 4 sus santisimos pies, 
de suplicarle se digne de escusarme de obligaciones tan grandes 4 que 
con tanta dificultad podre satisfacer, nominando para dichos oficios 
las personas que el Rey mi sefior tiene por bien de presentar 4 vuestra 
Santidad, que seran sin duda las que convengan 4 tan grande minis- 
terio, y para suplir las muchas faltas que yo por mi insuficiencia uviere 
cometido en su administracion, para que, 4 la hora de la muerte que 
no se me puede dilatar, lleve este consuelo quando me uviere de pre- 
sentar delante de la divina Magestad que sea siempre en favor de su 
santisima persona, favoreciendola con muchos favores como se lo 
suplico y suplicare siempre. De Madrid 24 de Junio, 1648. 

Beatisimo Padre. 

Besa el santisimo pie de vuestra Santidad su mas humilde siervo 

Fr. ANTONIO Inquisidor General. 


614 APPENDIX 


XV. 


EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSULTA OF THE COUNCIL OF THE INQUISITION, 
May 5, 1646, ON THE INDEPENDENT SUPERIORITY OF INQUISI- 
TORIAL JURISDICTION OVER OFFICIALS. 


(Archivo de la Corona de Aragon, Legajo 528). 
(See p. 346). 


Contra estas racones suelen oponer los celadores de las regalias que 
la distribucion de los jurisdicciones es una dellas pegadas 4 los mismos 
guesos de los reyes, que con estos terminos significan su inseparabilidad 
real y de aqui infieren que en todo tiempo la pueden moderar y quitar 
sin que ninguna potestad se lo pueda impedir. 

Sefior, esta razon tiene el vicio de que prueba mucho y si no se 
limita y restringe a la intelligencia sana y catolica tira 4 destruir toda 
la jurisdiccion eclesiastica y para este efecto se valid de ella el Rey 
Jacobo de Inglaterra en el tratado que dedicé 4 todos los principes 
cristianos, provocandolos 4 todos 4 que se hiciese cada uno una cabeca 
de las Iglesias de sus reinos, como lo era de la anglicana, y la limi- 
tacion cierta y verdadera de la dicha razon es que la jurisdiccion civil 
y politica es inferior 4 la espiritual y eclesiastica y que para materias 
que le tocan por la potestad directa puede tomar y asumir por la 
potestad indirecta todo lo que ha menester para su conservacion y 
recta administracion sin que las puedan impedir ni disponer en ellas 
los principes seculares. Y que las mas propias regalias de la dignidad 
regia son de derecho humano positivo 6 de derecho de las gentes, y la 
potestad suprema que ejerce la inquisicion por delegacion de la Sede 
apostolica en las causas de fee y concernientes 4 ella con todo lo demas 
de que necesita para su recto y libre ejercicio directa 6 indirectamente 
pertenece al derecho divino, y como tal se sobrepone 4 todo derecho 
humano y de las gentes y no esta sugeto 4 fueros ni leyes humanas, y 
lo menos que se puede decir es que los principes seculares tienen 
obligacion de darsela como queda dicho, y aunque estos tengan derecho 
para que la que se tomare 6 diere no sea mas que la que es menester, 
el juicio y arbitrio de la necesidad y de la extencion 6 limitacion de 
aquella pertenece 4 aquel en quien reside la dicha potestad eclesiastica 
suprema, porque funda la que tiene en el derecho divino y no es posible 
que sallia la pureca de la fe y la obediencia y rendimiento que los 
principes deben 4 la Iglesia y 4 su cabega sientan diferentemente de 
lo que aqui se dice, porque es el comun y verdadero sentir de los 
autores catolicos y lo que pide la subordinacion de los derechos humanos 
4 los divinos y de los temporales 4 los espirituales de lo cual se infiere 
que el entendimiento verdadero del axioma 6 modo de hablar referido 


DOCUMENTS 615 


se ha de restringir al uso de las jurisdicciones temporales que estan en 
una misma linea cuando no compiten lo divino con lo humano ni lo 
espiritual con lo temporal, porque estas y otras regalias temporales 
como ellas son tan inherentes 4 la potestad: regia que no se puede 
desnudar dellas ni enagenarles enteramente. 

Sefior, todos estos principios son los solidos y seguros y hay en esta 
materia con que los sefiores reyes progenitores de V. M. se han con- 
- formado asi en el sentir como en el obrar y los autores regnicolas de la 
corona han sentido y escrito en la misma conformidad y todo lo que 
sale de estos terminos con las doctrinas nuevas que pretenden que 
V. M. es duefio absoluto de esta jurisdiccion con facultad plena de 
disponer en ella para quitarla es incierto, mal seguro para la conciencia, 
en nada conveniente para el Estado y muy peligroso el uso de ello no 
solo de caer en hierros gravisimos, que despues no tengan reparo sino 
de que Dios nuestro sefior, cuia gloria es la mas interesada en el libre 
y recto ejercicio de la inquisicion, agraviado de lo que en esto se innovare, 
execute como suele castigos graves en los que pretenden estas mudancas 
que se apetecen con titulo de libertad 4 que aspiran siempre los reinos 
y son medio para perderlos, y quiera Dios que no sea una de las causas 
porque padece la Corona de Aragon tantos trabajos con la hostilidad 
de los que injustamente la pretenden usurpar, el no acabar de quietarse 
en las materias tocantes 4 la inquisicion, pretendiendo siempre intro- 
ducir novedades en ella, conque no solo se desagrada 4 Dios nuestro 
Sefior sino se ofende al Estado con las alteraciones que ocasionan los 
sospechosos en la fee que suele ser gente sediciosa de que el reino de 
Aragon tiene ejemplos presentes cuyos dafios no se pudieran atajar 
sino es por medio de la Inquisicion. 

(Siguen otras razones que aclaran lo que oh inquisicion pretende 
demostrar, las cuales razones en sustancia son) 

3° Que la jurisdiccion de la inquisicion es espiritual y no pueden 
modificarla el rey y las cortes sin el consentimiento del Inquisidor 
General. 

4* Que por su condicion de espiritual la inquisicion esta sobre los 
fueros; los derechos con que la inquisicion usa de la dicha jJurisdiccion 
son superiores 4 las fueros e independientes de ellos. 

6? Que si los brazos se obstinaban en no admitir las razones alegadas 
por la Inquisicion S. M. debia como el emperador Carlos V hizo en 
otras cortes el afio 1516 (sic) acordarse de su alma y conciencia y pre- 
ferir Ja perdida de parte de sus reinos 4 consentir en nada contra la 
honra de Dios y en diminucion y desautoridad del Santo Oficio que 
tanto los catolicos rey y reyna sus abuelos en sus testamentos y pos- 
_trimeras voluntades lo dexaron caramente encomendado. . . . 

El obispo de Plasencia, inquisidor general y este Consejo suplicamos 
a V. M. se sirva mandar se haga assi como lo pedimos en las dichas 
consultas con ponderacion de tantas y tan solidas ragones como en 


616 APPENDIX 


ellas se proponen, excluyendo las pretensiones de los quatro bracgos y 
manteniendo 4 la Inquisicion en el derecho que tiene y en la posesion 
en que estd de que toda su jurisdiccion sea tratada en aquel reino de 
Aragon como eclesiastica y secular y la mas alta de todas como deri- 
vada del derecho divino en que la Iglesia funda la suya, para conocer 
de las causas de la fe, y para que no le falten los ministros necesarios 
con la independencia que ha menester para el recto y libre ejercicio 
de la dicha jurisdiccion, y aunque presumimos que los dichos brazos, 
vistas las dichas razones, mostraran su fidelidad 4 Dios y a V. M. para 
contentarse del acuerda que se tomare, si todavia persistieren en sus 
pretensiones negando los servicios que se les piden V. M. debe preferir 
el de Dios en que consiste el reinar y ordenara en todo lo que fuere del 
suyo. Madrid 4 5 de Mayo de 1646. 


XVI. 


DECREE OF PHitip IV CONCERNING DISOBEDIENCE, MARcH 26, 1633. 
(Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 32, fol. 56). 
(See p. 347). 


Uno de los mayores dafios y de que han resultado mayores incon- 
venientes, en grave deservicio mio y de la quietud y conservacion de 
todos mis reinos, es el de la inobservancia y dilacion en la ejecucion de 
mis 6rdenes, pues importa poca resolverlas si no se envian y ejecutan a 
tiempo, pues pasada la sazon viene a ser infructuoso todo lo que se 
dispone, de que se han seguido dafios tan irreparables que quizd son 
Ja parte principal del apretado estado en que nos hallamos; diversos 
recursos y advertencias he hecho a mis consejeros sobre esto y signi- 
ficado con vivo sentimiento el dafio y encargado el reparo y aunque 
entiendo que en todos mis ministros debe ser igual a sus obligaciones 
la atencion y celo 4 mi servicio, la experiencia me ha mostrado que no 
ha bastado esto y que es necesario usar de medio mas eficaz y poderoso 
para que no se acabe de perder mi monarquia, pues me corre obligacion 
por el lugar en que Dios me ha puesto atajar su total ruina y entiendo 
ser la falta de obediencia y ejecucion lo que mas aprisa la puede causar. 

Por este he resuelto dar forma y regla en ello, disponiendose por 
arancel como se han de ejecutar mis ordenes y penas en que se ha de 
incurrir por la inobservancia de ellas, segun la calidad de cada una, 
y asi se formara para ese Consejo el que la tocare bien ajustado, y se 
me enviardé con distincion de las materias de oficio, hacienda y partes 
asi de gracia como de justicia, y de las penas en que han de ineurrir 
todos y se han de executar por el mismo consejo correspondientes 4 la 


DOCUMENTS 617 


calidad de la inobservancia y omision en la ejecucion, previniendo bien 
todos los casos en que cada uno puede faltar y aquellos casos que 
pueden ofrecerse y se ofrecen, que no puedan ser comprendidos, tam- 
bien me los consultara el consejo, porque quiero saber los que son, y 
los aranceles se hagan en veinte dias y se me envien para que resuelva 
la forma en que han de quedar ajustados y se publiquen. 
(RuBRICA DEL Rey). 
En San Lorenzo 4 15 de Octubre de 1633. 
Al Arzobispo inquisidor general. 


XVII. 
PROCLAMATION ON THE ARRIVAL OF AN INQUISITOR. 


(Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 31, fol. 194). 
(See p. 351). 


PREGON. 


Ahora oid que se os hace saber a todo hombre generalmente del 
parte del ilustrisimo y reverendisimo senor Don Antonio de Zuniga, 
prior de Castilla del Orden de San Juan de Jerusalem, Capitan y 
lugarteniente general de la sacra cesarea magestad en el Principado de 
Catalufia y Condado de Rosellon y Cerdefia, que como 4 su ilustrisima 
y reverendisima sefhoria y Real Consejo se hayan presentado por el 
procurador fiscal del oficio de la sancta inquisicion unas letras 0 pro- 
visiones patentes de la prefata cesarea magestad y con su real sella 
sellada otorgadas al muy venerable religioso y amado del sefior Rey 
Fray Juan Naverdu maestro en sacra teologia del orden de predica- 
dores, inquisidor de la heretica y apostatica pravedad en el Principado 
de Catalufia y a los ministros del dicho sancto oficio en y con las quales 
entre las otras cosas por los respectos y causas en las dichas provisiones 
contenidas su Cesarea magestad manda con grandes penas al dicho 
sefior lugarteniente general y otros oficiales de Catalufia asi mayores 
como menores que cada y quando que el dicho venerable inquisidor 
y los otros oficiales y ministros del dicho sancto oficio para exercer sus 
oficios demandaren 6 alguno de ellos demandare auxilio lo haya de 
prestar y los dichos sus oficios permitan libremente exercitar sin 
impedimento alguno, y demandando el auxilio del brazo seglar incon- 
tienti lo hayan de dar, tomando y prendiendo qualesquier personas que 
por el dicho venerable inquisidor fueren nombradas y aquellas empris- 
ionar y tener presas y haberlas de las jurisdicciones de qualesquier 


618 APPENDIX 


personas adonde el dicho inquisidor quisiere y mudar aquellas y castigar 
y punirlas con las debidas penas cada y quando por el dicho venerable 
inquisidor sera declarado y porque el dicho venerable inquisidor y 
otros oficiales y ministros del dicho sancto oficio mas libre y segura- 
mente puedan ejercer los dichos sus oficios, su cesarea magestad al 
dicho venerable inquisidor sus compafieros, notario y alguazil y otros 
oficiales y ministros del dicho sancto oficio familiares y bienes de ellos 
y qualquier dellos pone y constituye debajo su especial guiaje, cus- 
todia, proteccion y encomienda real segun en dichas letras y provision 
real, la data de las quales fué en Valladolid 4 trece del mes de Febrero 
del afio de la navidad de Dios nuestro sefor mil quinientos y veinta y 
tres, aquestas y otras cosas mas largamente se contienen. 

Por tanto queriendo su ilustrisima sefioria que las cosas mandadas y 
proveidas por la sacra cesarea y real magestad sean 4 ejecucion devidas 
y 4 todo hombre manifiestas 4 su aplicacion del dicho procurador fiscal 
del dicho oficio de la sancta inquisicion por el tenor del presente publico 
pregon, notificando las dichas cosas 4 todo hombre generalmente dice 
y manda su ilustrisima y reverendisima sefioria 4 todos y qualesquier 
oficiales ansi mayores como menores y 4 otras y singulares personas 
de qualquier estado dignadad o condicion que sean que la dicha y 
precalendada letra y provision real y todas y qualesquier cosas en ella 
contenidas y expresadas segun mejor y plenamente en ella se contiene 
del dicho sancto oficic de la sancta inquisicion tengan y guarden y hagan 
tener y guardar inviolablemente segun su narracion y tenor y contra 
aquella no hagan ni vengan, ni hacer ni venir permitan en manera 
alguna si desean no incurrir en las penas en dicha y precalendada real 
provision contenidas, y porque alguna no pueda de dichas cosas allegar 
ignorancia, manda su ilustrisima y reverendisima sefioria el presente 
ser publicada por los lugares acostumbrados y guardase quien se ha de 
guardar. 

Eu PRIOR DE CASTILLA. 

Vidit Joannes de Cardona, Cancellarius. 

Vidit Jacobus Ferrer, Registrator Thesaurarius. 

Gundisalbus de Cabra. 

Registrata in curia locumtenentis. 


PUBLICACIONES DE LOS PREGONES. 


Fué publicado el presente publico pregon por los lugares acostum- 
brados de Barcelona por mi Canals en lugar de Francisco de Sevia con 
son de quatro trompetas 4 veinte y tres de Diciembre de mil quinientos 
y veinte y tres. Canals. 


DOCUMENTS 619 


XVIII. 


MEMORIA DE LA REFORMA DE MINISTROS DEL SANTO OFICIO QUE HIZO 
HACER EL REY EN 1646. 


(Biblioteca Nacional de Madrid, Seccion de MSS. D 118, and S 294 
fol; 122): 
(See p. 461). 


En las ultimas cortes que se celebraron en Aragon el afio pasado de 
1646, fue servido su Magestad (Dios le guarde) de aminorar el numero 
de familiares que conforme 4 fueros de aquel Reyno podia haver, 
extinguiendole 4 solo numero de 400, caviendo mas de 2000 en lo 
antiguo, y que se practicava como consta largamente por la concordia 
antigua entre el Reyno y la Inquisicion. Quitoles assimismo las exemp- 
ciones de que gozaban dichos familiares en la forma que tanvien consta 
por los nuebos cabos donde se puede veer. Instaron sobre esto con 
apretadissimos esfuerzos los quatro brazos de dichas cortes y entre 
ellos algunos ministros de Inquisicion (que aun no vasto el serlo para 
que dejasen de manifestar el odio comun que contra ella y sus actiones 
tienen). Conociaselo su Magestad y antes de concederles cosa alguna 
que tocase 4 la Inquisicion (de quien dijo era las nifias de sus ojos) 
les mando 6 pidié la dejasen en el estado que estava, y que como no le 
llegasen 4 ella concederia todo lo demas que pretendian, haciendo 
assimismo mercedes particulares 4 los Aragoneses, como con efecto 
les higo mas de trecientas y sesenta que se publicaron en un dia, nom- 
brandolas y las personas 4 quien las hacia. Nada de esto vasto para 
que dejasen de replicar con una y otra embaxada por parte de los 
brazos, deteniendo 4 su Magestad dos 6 tres dias en el conbento de 
Santa Engracia de Zaragoza, estando el coche 4 la puerta para venirse 
4 Madrid, hasta que viendo su pertinacia y que sin duda le detendrian 
mas sin concluir el solio en las Cortes que era lo que esperava, les con- 
cedié todo lo que en esta parte quisieron. Quedaron los Aragoneses 
muy contentos, pareciendoles haver vencido lo mas y que ya le faltava 
al Rey el unico recursso que tenia en aquel Reyno. Desde este dia fue 
postrandose la autoridad y mucha estimacion que la Inquisicion tenia 
en Aragon, excediendo en esta parte 4 otros, pues tal vez miraban 4 
un Inquisidor con mas veneracion que al Argobispo y Virrey y oy se 
vee lo contrario y aun se oye que algunos dicen ya se acabo la Inqui- 
sicion. Experimentase esto cada dia en los ministros de ella, pues, 
siendo conforme 4 las hordinaciones del Reyno que ningun vecino 
aloje en su casa mas que un soldado, no excediendo el numero de ellos 
al de los vecinos, no solo le hechan al familiar el que le podia tocar sino 
tuvicse exempcion alguna, pero porque es familiar le hechan dos o tres. 


620 APPENDIX 


Muchos se an quejado de este agravio al Tribunal, y por escusar 
enpehos 6 lo que podia resultar y se a tomado por expediente suabe 
escrivir al Comisario de la villa 6 lugar donde se hace el agravio, hable 
con el Justicia 6 Jurados de el, y que con buen modo les de 4 entender 
que no se deve hacer ni pasar por aquello, y aunque algunos an tenido 
atencion 4 ello 4 otros les a faltado, y tal vez 6 los mas a sido necesario 
no darse el Tribunal por entendido 6 tolerado, mirando al estado en 
que se alla, y tanvien 4 los ahogos que tiene el Reyno con los aloja- 
mientos. Hacen contribuyr 4 los familiares en los Vagajes y reparti- 
mientos concejiles y que no son concejiles, y ultimamente se vee y toca 
con las manos que en todo lo que no es negocio de fee tiene postradas 
las fuerzas antiguas el Tribunal de Aragon. 


XIX. 


DEcREE OF Puitip IJ] ON QUARRELS BETWEEN BISHOPS AND INQUIS- 
ITORS. 


(Archivo de Simancas, Inquisicion, Libro 29, fol. 177). 
(See p. 497). 


He mandado escribir estas cartas que aqui decis, pero, porque se ha 
visto y vee cada dia que las Inquisiciones particulares se meten en 
cossas que derechamente no tocan a la fe ni al Santo Oficio sino solo 
a estender y ampliar su jurisdiccion por fines particulares de que han 
resultado todas las dificultades y encuentros que ha avido entre las 
Inquisiciones y los perlados y entretanto que esto no se remediare 
nunca dejara de averlas. Sera bien y assi os lo encargo que procureis 
componer esto de manera que los Inquisidores no se metan en mas de 
lo que les toca y que al mismo tiempo que yo mandare escribir a los 
obispos escribais vos a las Inquisiciones que por ningun casso se metan 
en cossa que derechamente no les toque, apercibiendoles que no sola- 
mente no lo consentireis pero que castigareis 4 los que hiciereh lo 
contrario con demonstracion de rigor, y si excedieren no os contenteis 
con reprehenderlos blandamente sino que con effecto los castigueis, 
porque con esto se justificara lo que yo escribiere 4 los perlados y ellos 
se acomodaran 4 lo que fuere justo, y de otra manera tendran ocasion 
de acudir 4 mi por el remedio de sus agravios, lo cual es necesario que 
se escuse. 


THE CAMBRIDGE MODERN 
HISTORY 


PLANNED BY 
THE LATE LORD ACTON, LL.D. 
Regius Professor of Modern History in the University of Cambridge 
EDITED BY 
A. W. WARD, Litt.D., G. W. PROTHERO, Litt.D. 
and STANLEY LEATHES, M.A. 


To be Complete in Twelve Volumes, Royal 8vo, of which it is hoped that 
two can be issued in each year. ‘These volumes will appear 
in two Series beginning respectively with 


Voi. I. (The Renaissance) and Vot. VII. (The United States) 


THE SCOPE OF THE WORK AS PROJECTED WILL INCLUDE 


I. The Renaissance VII. The United States 

II. The Reformation VIII. The French Revolution 
Ill. The Wars of Religions IX. Napoleon 
IV. The Thirty Years’ War X. Restoration and Reaction 
V. Bourbons and Stuarts XI. The Growth of Nationalities 
VI. The Eighteenth Century XII. The Latest Age 


“THERE CAN BE NO QUESTION ABOUT THE 
GREAT VALOR. OF PTHE? WORK > (IN FACT, 
IT 1S INVALUABLE TO EVERY HISTORICAL 
STUDENT." — PUBLIC LEDGER, PHILADELPHIA .. . 


NOW READY 

THE RENAISSANCE THE UNITED STATES 
(Vol. I.) Royal 8vo, $4.00, wef. Car- (Vol. VII.) Royal 8vo, $4.00, ze/, Car- 
riage, 30 cents. riage, 30 cents. 

CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS: CONTRIBUTING FA ale 
The late Bishop Creighton, D.D., E. J. John A. Doyle, M. A., Miss Mary Bateson, 
Payne, J. B. Bury, ey. Leathes, Ed-= A. G. Bradley, M Melville M. Bigelow, J. B. 
ward Armstrong, L. Burd, Richard McMaster, H. W. Wilson, Woodrow Wil= 
Garnett, Horatio ead ANP: Tout, Emil son, John G. Nicolay, John Christopher 
Reich, H. Butler Clarke, A. W. Ward, Schwab, Theodore Clarke Smith, John B. 
James Gairdner, Wm. Cunningham, Sir Moore, Henry Crosby Emery, Barrett 
Richard C. Jebb, M. R. James, Wm. Barry, Wendell. With complete Bibliography, Chrono- 
Henry Charles Lea. logical Table of Leading Events, and Index. 


THE REFORMATION (Vol. II.) Royal 8vo, $4.00, ze#. Carriage, 30 cents. 
THE FRENCH REVOLUTION (Vol. VIII.) Royal 8vo, $4.00, ze¢, Carriage, 


30 cents. 


THE WARS OF RELIGIONS (Vol. Ill.) Royal 8vo, $4.00, ez Carriage, 


30 cents. 


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 


66 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK 


HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES 


From the Compromise of 1850 
By JAMES FORD RHODES 


In Five Volumes. Cloth. 8vo. $12.50, net 


“Tt is the one work now within reach of the young American student of to-day in which 
he may learn the connected story of the great battle that resulted in the overthrow of slavery 
and the rededication of the republic to unsullied freedom. In no other publication are these 
facts so concisely, so fully, and so well presented, and the student who makes careful study of 
this work will fully understand, not only the actual causes which led to the war, but he will 
know how gradually they were developed from year to year under varying political power, until 
the nation was ripe for the revolution. ... Taking the work all together, we regard it as the 
most valuable political publication of the age, and the intelligent citizen who does not become 
its careful student must do himself great injustice.” — 7he Times, Philadelphia, Pa. 


“There is the same abundant and almost exhaustive collation of material, the same sim- 
plicity and directness of method, the same good judgment in the selection of topics for full 
treatment or for sketchy notice, the same calmness of temper and absence of passionate partisan- 
ship. He may fairly be said to be a pupil of the Gardiner school, and to have made the great 
English historian a model in subordinating the literary element to the judicial.” — 7he Nation. 


A SHORT HISTORY OF GERMANY 
| By ERNEST F. HENDERSON 


A.B. (Trinity), M.A. (Harvard), Pu.D. (Berlin) 
Author of ‘‘A fiistory of Germany in the Middle Ages’’ 


In Two Volumes. Cloth. 8vo. $4.00, net 


Vol. I. go A.D. to 1648 A.D. 
Vol. II. 1648 A.D. to 1871 A.D. 


“This work is in the form of a continuous narrative, unbroken by monographs on par- 
ticular institutions or phases of Germany’s development, but covering the whole subject with a 
unity of treatment such as has seldom been attained by earlier writers in the same field. In 
this respect, at least, the book is unique among popular histories of Germany in the English 
language.” — Review of Reviews. 


“Jt has remained for Mr. Henderson to treat at all effectively in English in a short space 
the development of the German nation as a progressive and ever mobile whole. And to 
appreciate the difficulty of the task before him, we have only to glance at the powers and 
forces that work out their expression if not their fulhlment, on German ground and through 
German institutions.” — Commercial Advertiser, New York. 


“Of very decided importance. ... We have never seen in English a more satisfactory 
record of the story of Germany— one that fulfilled as many requisites as does that under review. 
Mr. Henderson writes in a straightforward, unstrained style which makes his work easy read- 
ing.” — Raltimore Sun. 


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
66 Fifth Avenue, New York 


THE AMERICAN COMMONWEALTH 
By JAMES BRYCE 


Author of ‘‘ The Holy Roman Empire,’’ M.P. for Aberdeen 


In two volumes. Third edition, completely revised throughout, 
with additional chapters. Crown 8vo. Cloth, gilt tops 


vol. I. THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT — THE STATE GOVERNMENT. Pp. xix + 724. 
Price, $1.75, net 


Vol. II. THE Party System — PuBLIC OPINION — ILLUSTRATIONS AND REFLECTIONS — 
SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS. Pp. 904. Price, $2.25, net 


The two volumes in a box, $4.00, net 


‘Tt is not too much to call ‘The American Commonwealth’ one of the most distinguished 
additions to political and social science which this generation has seen. It has done, and will 
continue tc do, a great work in informing the world concerning the principles of this govern- 
ment.” — Philadelphia Evening 7 elegrapn. 

“ No enlightened American can desire a better thing for his country than the widest diffu- 
sion and the most thorough reading of Mr. Bryce’s impartial and penetrating work.” — Literary 
World. 


THE LIFE OF NAPOLEON I. 


INCLUDING NEW MATERIALS FROM THE BRITISH OFFICIAL RECORDS 
By J. H. ROSE, M.A. 


Author of ‘‘ The Revolutionary and Napoleonic Era, 1789—1815,’’ etc. 


IHustrated. In two volumes. Cloth. 8vo. $4.00, net 


“Mr. Rose seems to have read everything bearing on his subject, and to discriminate wisely 
as to the value of the authorities. In particular he has for the first time thoroughly explored 
the English Foreign Office Records. The information which he derives from them serves in 
general to confirm the views held by the majority, at least of competent judges. English policy 
during the great struggle which arose out of the French Revolution was, as it has usually been, 
honest and sound in purpose, but too often ill managed and weak in its methods.... Mr. Rose 
excels in the difficult art of stating complicated matters briefly and yet clearly.... Best of all, 
perhaps, is his chapter on the schemes for colonial expansion which Napoleon set on foot as 
soon as France was at peace; it is admirably clear, and contains much that will be new to most 
readers, Mr. Rose is equally successful in his military narrative, a subject which is especially 
difficult to treat both briefly and lucidly. He always sees the essential points and never includes 
needless details, though here and there an additional fact would have made the whole more 
easy of comprehension. ... We do not know where else to find a series of great military 
operations described so well and also so concisely. . . . Nothing could be better than the pages 
in which he describes and comments on the death of Pitt.” — The London Times. 

“The author is John Holland Rose, the well-known English historian, and his biography 
of Napoleon Bonaparte will have little difficulty in taking rank as the best in the language. 
Napoleon is, to Mr. Rose, neither a demi-god nor an ogre, but a wonderfully brilliant man, 
whose complete, but on the whole, attractive personality is made the subject of a penetrating 
and luminous psychological study.” — 7he Philadelphia Press. 


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
66 Fifth Avenue, New York 


RS aye 
ora 


eh tea es ‘ ss 
! : - fers 2 


Date Due 


gene 


ene oe 


ier 


og 


— 
Jarra, 


AE Riya 


a te =e 


BX1735 .L435v 
A put at the inauisiton of pen: 


A 


P= 1 1012 00128 9364 


